ReGenesis
ReGenesis was a Canadian television program produced by The Movie Network and Movie Central in conjunction with Shaftesbury Films. The series, which ran for four seasons, revolves around the scientists of NorBAC (The North American Biotechnology Advisory Commission), a fictional organization with a lab based in Toronto. The organization investigates problems of a scientific nature, such as bio-terrorism, mysterious diseases or radical changes in environment throughout Canada, the United States, and Mexico. NorBAC is headed by David Sandström (played by Peter Outerbridge), the chief scientist and molecular biologist. Through this character the show often addresses topical social, political and ethical issues related to the science at hand.
The series is broadcast on The Movie Network, Movie Central, Global, Sci-fi (UK), Arte (France and Germany), Sci-Fi and Canvas (Belgium), Jimmy (SKY) (Italy), Calle 13 (Spain) and Sic Radical (Portugal). Seasons 1, 2 and 3 were also available on The Movie Network's On Demand service, available on Cogeco Cable and Rogers Cable. In September 2007 they started airing in syndication in the United States via Program Partners with ad-sales by Sony Pictures Television. Seasons 1 through 3 are available to view at Hulu.com. In Fall 2007 WOWOW began airing ReGenesis in Japan. The show will soon begin airing on the Movie Smart channel in Turkey. International Distribution is handled by Oasis International.
Aled Edwards, scientific consultant for the series, is a noted Canadian molecular biologist, and the director of the Structural Genomics Consortium.

ReGenesis has been an international pioneer in integrating interactive media elements into the series. The first successfully deployed alternate reality game paired with a major television broadcast is called the ReGenesis Extended Reality and was created by Xenophile Media in association with Shaftesbury Films. It won the Canadian New Media Award for Best Cross-Platform project of 2004 and an FITC Design & Technology Award for Excellence in Convergence. In 2006 the alternate reality game won the Banff World Television Festival [1] Award for Interactive Television and a Gemini Award for Best Cross-Platform. An exploratory game, the ReGenesis Extended Reality draws viewers into a conspiracy and mystery that weaves in and out of the TV series, using the internet, email and other media to immerse the viewer, blurring the line between fiction and reality. ReGenesis Extended Reality harnesses the power of enthusiastic fans that seed the site with discussion content and collaborative investigations. Extensive knowledge of various chemistry and biotechnology issues is required to find out why the plot in many episodes can't be true (if it can't).
Other interactive elements include ReGenesis:ReMixed, a series of podcasts featuring the music of ReGenesis, as well as exclusive interviews with some of the people involved in putting the show together.
However, neither of these were continued for the third or fourth season of the series.




The main title theme song for ReGenesis is "Anywhere But Here" by the Montreal band Behavior. Behavior is an alias for producer / composer Michael McCann. The show's score is primarily composed by Tom Third with numerous contributions throughout by film/TV composer Rob Carli.
A comprehensive list of all the music played in the first two seasons can be found at the ReGenesis:ReMixed site.


On November 11, 2008, Season 1 was released in North America on DVD by Koch Vision. The four-disc set includes all 13 first season episodes presented in a letterboxed format. Special features include a making of, photo gallery, and "The Facts Behind the Fiction" (the white papers published by the Ontario Genomics Institute). Shaftesbury Films has confirmed that Seasons 2, 3, and 4 will follow through-out 2009 and 2010.
The first season has also been released in the UK through Universal Studios UK. The second season was later released to European countries by Buena Vista Home Entertainement, though it was presented in a Pan and Scan format.


