Azumanga Daioh
 Kurokawa
 Tokyopop
  Tong Li
 Daiwon C.I.
 Norma Editorial
Azumanga Daioh (あずまんが大王 ,Azumanga Daiō?) is a Japanese comedy manga written and illustrated by Kiyohiko Azuma.[2] It was published by MediaWorks in the magazine Dengeki Daioh from 1999 to 2002 and collected in four tankōbon volumes. It is drawn as a series of vertical four-panel comic strips called yonkoma and depicts the lives of a group of girls during their three years as high-school classmates.
It was adapted as an anime, Azumanga Daioh: the Animation, which was produced by J.C.Staff and aired from the week of April 8, 2002 until the week of September 30, 2002.[3] It was broadcast on TV Tokyo, Aichi Television Broadcasting, Television Osaka, and AT-X in five-minute segments every weekday,[4] then repeated as a 25-minute compilation that weekend, for a total of 130 five-minute segments collected in 26 episodes. The compilation episodes, which were the only versions to include the title and credits sequences, were released on VHS and DVD by Starchild Records;[5] the five-minute segments can be distinguished by their individual titles.

The series title has no particular significance to the story. "Azumanga" is a portmanteau of "Azuma" (the author's name) and "manga," while "Daioh" comes from the magazine in which it was originally published, Dengeki Daioh.[6] In the anime, "Daioh" is mentioned during the next episode previews, in context meaning "great king."
The name "Azumanga" is also used as a general term for Kiyohiko Azuma's other works (illustrations and comics).[7] The titles of two collections published in 1998 and 2001 containing official comics of Pioneer animations were Azumanga and Azumanga 2.[8][9] Azumanga was later republished in a reduced-size edition called Azumanga Recycle.[10]

Azumanga Daioh chronicles everyday life in an unnamed Japanese high school in Tokyo,[11] following the trials and triumphs of six girls: reserved Sakaki's obsession with cute animals, Chiyo's struggle to fit in with girls five years older, Osaka's spacey nature and skewed perspective on the world, Yomi's aggravation at an annoying best friend, Tomo, whose energy is rivaled only by her lack of sense, and Kagura's efforts in sports and school. The story covers three years of tests, culture festivals, and athletic events at school, after-school life at the nearby shopping district, at Chiyo's large house, vacations spent at Chiyo's summer home on the beach and at Magical Land, a theme park. It is generally realistic in tone, marked by occasional bursts of surrealism and absurdity, such as Osaka's bizarre imaginings, Chiyo's ponytails being "unscrewed", and an episode featuring the characters' New Year's dreams.
The manga and anime follow the same story line, though there are differences in small details.[12] Some jokes could not be dramatized as written and were either changed or excised completely. In the first manga volume, Osaka's appearance is noticeably different from in the anime and succeeding manga volumes. In the same vein, Sakaki's initial unapproachable demeanor in the manga is downplayed in the anime.

The main cast of Azumanga Daioh consists of six schoolgirls and two of their teachers. Secondary characters include Kimura-sensei, a creepy male teacher with an unhealthy obsession with teenage girls, and Kaorin, a classmate with a crush on Sakaki.


Azumanga Daioh was originally published in yonkoma (four-panel) format by MediaWorks' in the magazine Dengeki Daioh from February 1999 to May 2002 and collected in four tankōbon volumes.[2] A new edition with additional artwork will be released in Japan to commemorate the manga's 10th anniversary.[13]
The series was licensed in English in North America and the United Kingdom by ADV Manga, releasing all four volumes between 2003 and 2004. ADV later reprinted the series on November 7, 2007 in an omnibus edition (ISBN 978-1-4139-0364-5).[2] In 2009, Yen Press acquired the rights to publish an English version of Yotsuba& in North America, and will be publishing a new translation of the series in December 2009.[14] In Europe, Azumanga Daioh is licensed in French by Kurokawa, in German by Tokyopop, in Spanish by Norma Editorial, and in Finnish by Punainen jättiläinen. In Asia, the series has been licensed in Korean by Daiwon C.I., in Thai by Negibose Comics and in Chinese by Tong Li.

