Black Book (film)
Black Book (Dutch: Zwartboek) is a 2006 Second World War film directed by Paul Verhoeven, and starring Carice van Houten, Sebastian Koch, Thom Hoffman, and Halina Reijn. The story is about a young Jewish woman in the Netherlands who becomes a spy for the resistance during World War II after tragedy befalls her in an encounter with the Nazis. The film had its world premiere on September 1, 2006 at the Venice Film Festival and its public release on September 14, 2006 in the Netherlands.
The press in the Netherlands was divided about the film, but with three Golden Calves Black Book was the most awarded film at the Netherlands Film Festival in 2006. The international press responded positively to the film and especially to the performance of actress Carice van Houten. It was the Dutch submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film in 2007, but the film was not nominated.
At the time of its release, it was the most expensive Dutch film ever made, and also the Netherlands' most commercially successful, with that country's highest box office gross of 2006. By January 12, 2007 1,000,000 people had seen the film.

In October 1956, Ronnie (Halina Reijn), a Dutch woman married to a Canadian minister of religion, is on a tourist package trip in Israel. On a kibbutz she bumps into a schoolteacher, Rachel Rosenthal, whom she realises she knew during the Second World War.
The film then flashes back to 1944, and begins the story of Rachel Stein (Carice van Houten), a Dutch Jewish singer who had lived in Berlin before the war and is now living in hiding from the Nazi regime in the occupied Netherlands.
When the house that she has been hiding in is destroyed, Rachel manages to escape and visits a lawyer named Smaal (Dolf de Vries), who provides her with some of her father's money so that she can flee, helped by a member of the resistance named Van Gein (Peter Blok). Rachel is reunited with her family and tries to flee by boat through the Biesbosch with other Jews from the Nazi-occupied part of the Netherlands to the liberated southern part of the country. However, in a trap they are ambushed on the river by members of the German SS, who kill them and loot the bodies. Rachel alone survives, but she does not manage to escape from occupied territory.
She becomes involved with a resistance group in The Hague, under the leadership of Gerben Kuipers (Derek de Lint), assumes the non-Jewish alias of Ellis de Vries, and dyes her hair blonde. Working closely with physician and fellow resistance member Hans Akkermans (Thom Hoffman), she seduces local SD commander Hauptsturmführer Ludwig Müntze (Sebastian Koch) and obtains a job as a secretary at SD headquarters. There, Ellis recognizes Obersturmführer Günther Franken (Waldemar Kobus), Müntze's brutal deputy, as the SS officer who oversaw the massacre of her fleeing refugee party, and manages to plant a bug in his office. She falls in love with Müntze, who, in contrast to Franken, is not abusive or sadistic. He works out that she is a Jew, but does not care. She also becomes friends with her Dutch colleague Ronnie, who collaborates with the Germans, working for them, being sexually available to them (particularly Franken), and accepting stolen gifts from them.
Having worked out that it was Van Gein who betrayed Ellis, her family and the other Jews to the SS in return for a cut of the profits, some members of Ellis' resistance cell decide to abduct him in order to expose a suspected traitor in their midst. The plot goes wrong when Akkermans's chloroform fails to work, Van Gein fights back and is killed. Franken responds by planning to kill forty hostages, including most of the plotters, but Müntze, who realises the war is lost and has been negotiating with the resistance, cancels the order.
Müntze confronts Ellis as being a member of the resistance. She persuades him to search Franken's safe, which Ronnie had claimed contained the money, gold and jewels stolen from fleeing Jews (against SS regulations, since Franken is keeping the profits for himself). When a search of the safe by the commanding officer, Obergruppenführer Käutner (Christian Berkel), reveals nothing, the apparently angry and embarrassed Franken reveals that Müntze has been negotiating with Dutch resistance "terrorists" for a truce. Müntze is condemned to death and imprisoned, along with members of the resistance group who are to be shot as a reprisal for the killing of Van Gein. Ellis agrees to participate in a rescue attempt for the resistance prisoners only on the condition that they free Müntze too, and reluctantly the others agree. However, the attempt fails because their plan has been betrayed by the unknown insider, and all of the prisoners and rescuers, except Akkermans and another resister, are killed.
Ellis is subsequently arrested and jailed by the SD. It emerges that Franken has known about her and the bug all the time. He uses it to make the resistance group believe she is the Nazi collaborator, framing her for the catastrophic failure of the rescue operation. However, with Ronnie's help, she and Müntze escape and the two of them hide in the countryside.
When the country is liberated by the Allies, Franken attempts to escape by boat, but is killed by Akkermans. Ronnie, instead of being imprisoned and publicly shamed as a collaborator, latches on to the Canadian captain she subsequently marries. Suspecting Smaal is the traitor, Müntze and Ellis confront him, but he shows her the titular black book in which he had detailed all his dealings with the Jews he helped. He and his wife are then murdered by an unknown man. Müntze is arrested by the Canadians and Ellis is seized by the Dutch, who recognise her as a "collaborator", but not before she grabs the book. Müntze's former commanding officer, Käutner, now working with the Allies against the communists, convinces a Canadian colonel that an Allied occupation agreement allows the German military to discipline its own soldiers and Müntze is executed on the death warrant issued prior to the surrender as punishment for his negotiations with Ellis's resistance cell.
Ellis is held in a temporary "prison" for collaborators, but is rescued from public humiliation by Akkermans, now a colonel in the Dutch Army, who then tries to kill her with an overdose of insulin. She survives by eating a bar of chocolate to counteract the drug. It then emerges that Akkermans is the traitor responsible for the brutal death of her family at the hands of Franken and his Nazis. He has also murdered Smaal and Franken, taking all the money, gold and jewels stolen from the Jews.
Ellis proves her innocence to British intelligence and to the former resistance leader Gerben Kuipers by means of the black book, which shows that many Jews were brought to Akkermans for medical help just prior to their murders. Together, Ellis and Kuipers intercept the fleeing Akkermans, who is hiding in a coffin in a hearse which he has filled with stolen money, gold and jewels. Ellis seals the coffin's air vents, suffocating him.
The film then flashes forwards again to Israel and shows Rachel meeting her husband and two children and entering Kibbutz Stein, which a sign reveals was funded from recovered money stolen from Jews killed during the war. As the film ends, Israeli soldiers arrive to protect the kibbutz as the Suez Crisis begins.



After 20 years of film making in the United States, Paul Verhoeven returned to his homeland, the Netherlands, for the making of Black Book. The story for the film was written by Verhoeven and the screenwriter Gerard Soeteman, with whom he made successful films such as Turkish Delight (1973) and Soldier of Orange (1977). The two men had been working on the script for fifteen years,[1] but they only solved their problems with the story in the early 2000s, by changing the main character from male to female. According to Paul Verhoeven Black Book was born out of elements that did not fit in any of his earlier movies, and it can be seen as a supplement to his earlier film about World War II Soldier of Orange.[2]
Verhoeven has emphasized that the story does not show an obvious moral contrast between characters, for a theme of moral relativism:
Black Book is not a true story, unlike Soldier of Orange, but Verhoeven states that many of the events are true.[4] As in the film, the German headquarters were in The Hague. In 1944 many Jews that tried to cross to liberated parts of the southern Netherlands were entrapped by Dutch policemen. As in the film, crossing attempts took place in the Biesbosch.[2] The events in the story are also related to the life of Paul Verhoeven. Verhoeven was born in 1938 and he grew up in The Hague during the Second World War.[5]

The initial estimate of the budget for making Black Book was €12,000,000. According to film producer Rob Houwer, who worked with Paul Verhoeven on previous films, it was not possible to get the job done for that amount of money. San Fu Maltha produced the film together with three other producers. He tried to economize on different parts such as the scenes in Israel, that could have been left out without changing the plot, but this was not negotiable for Paul Verhoeven.[1]
Because of financing problems the filming did not start as planned in 2004 but was delayed until August 2005.[6][7] In this month it was announced that Black Book received about €2,000,000 support from the Publieke omroep, the CoBO Fund, and the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science.[8] There were also several foreign investors, which made the film a Belgian, British, and German coproduction. With a final estimated budget of €18,000,000 the film was the most expensive Dutch film ever, at the time of its release.[1]
In October 2006 twelve crew members and businessmen started a lawsuit in which they demanded the bankruptcy of Zwartboek Productie B.V., the legal entity founded for the film. Some of them were already waiting for more than a year to get their money, in total tens of thousands of euros. Production company Fu Works settled the case and promised to pay the creditors.[9]

The shooting of the film was delayed in 2004 due to financial problems[6] and Paul Verhoeven's health issues.[10] Because of the delay there was a lawsuit regarding lead actress Carice van Houten, who had agreed to act in a play. When van Houten was forced to return to the set, the theater company sued over the costly delay to their own production. The outcome of the lawsuit was that the production company had to pay €60,000 for her unavailability.[11]
The shooting of the film took place from August 24 until December 19, 2005[12] on locations in the Netherlands, including Hardenberg, Giethoorn, The Hague and Dordrecht, and in Israel. In the opening scene a real pre-war farm was blown up in the municipality of Hardenberg. The farm had already been declared uninhabitable and ready to be demolished.[13] Some underwater explosions were filmed in a lake near Giethoorn.[14] In the center of The Hague they built bunkers to cover up modern day objects such as the entrance to an underground car park.[15] Great attention to detail was paid in the film. Several stage props were reproduced from the 1940s, such as signs, posters and the black book itself.[16] Furthermore, in one of the liberation scenes in The Hague, as many as 1,100 or 1,200 extras appeared.[17]
During the shooting the general public were able to see making of scenes on their mobile phones and on the internet.[18]


The screenplay by Paul Verhoeven and Gerard Soeteman was turned into a thriller novel by Dutch writer Laurens Abbink Spaink. The book was published in September 2006 by Uitgeverij Podium, and contains photos and an afterword by Paul Verhoeven and Gerard Soeteman. Laurens Abbink Spaink says about the book: "Black Book is a literary thriller. Its form is in between the typical American novelization, only describing what the camera sees, and a literary novel. The novelization adds something to the film. It gave Rachel Stein a past, memories and a house. In the film she did not have a personal space."[19]

The soundtrack of the film was released on October 2, 2006 by Milan Records. The album contains four 1930s-1940s songs sung by actress Carice van Houten, as she also performed them as Rachel Stein in the film. Three of them are in German, one in English. The other tracks of the film score are written by Anne Dudley. The album was recorded in London and produced by Roger Dudley.[20]

The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 77% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 132 reviews.[21] Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 71 out of 100, based on 34 reviews.[22]

Black Book had its world premiere on 
