Afro Samurai
Afro Samurai (アフロサムライ ,Afuro Samurai?) is a Japanese dōjinshi manga series created by Takashi Okazaki, originally featured in the NOU NOU HAU[2] dōjin magazine. It was adapted into a 5-episode anime miniseries directed by Fuminori Kizaki and produced by Gonzo, a Japanese animation studio. The first episode was shown online on January 1, 2007 and premièred on Spike TV on January 4, 2007 at 11:00pm EST. The anime series has since gone on to air in Canada, the UK and the US, where it premiered on SPIKE TV on May 4, 2007[3], and Japan, where it was broadcast on Fuji Television. It also premiered on MTV in Australia in August 2007.[4] The anime series features noted American actor Samuel L. Jackson as the voice of the titular character and his sidekick, as well as one of the co-producers, and also features Ron Perlman and Kelly Hu as character voices. Wu-Tang Clan member RZA produced the original hip hop musical score,[5] which was released on compact disc by Koch Records on January 30, 2007 in both uncut and edited versions. The series was also licensed for North American distribution by Funimation, who released two versions: a SpikeTV version and an unrated director's cut on DVD and Blu-ray Disc. Both DVD versions were released on May 22, 2007 with the Blu-ray Disc version being released on August 26 of the following year. In the United Kingdom, a Bravo Numbered Limited Edition, equivalent to the US Spike TV edition and featuring the same red themed artwork was released on 2 July 2007. A Directors’ Cut Edition Box Set, featuring new artwork, was released later on 12 October 2007. A second Bravo edition featuring artwork similar to the UK Director’s Cut was released on 21 March 2008. A Blu-ray disc version has been released in North America. In August 2005, Japan-based game developers Namco announced they would be releasing Afro Samurai related video games.[6]

The TV anime series is set in a "futuristic, yet feudal Japan," and stars a samurai named Afro, so named because of his hair. The story follows Afro as he tries to avenge his father's murder.[7] In the world of Afro Samurai, it is said that the one who becomes "Number One" will rule the world, wielding powers akin to a god. Someone becomes Number One by killing the previous Number One and taking his ceremonial headband. However, the only rule in this world is that only the "Number Two" (also designated by a sacred headband) is allowed to challenge the "Number One." The downside of this is that anyone (and typically everyone) can challenge and try to kill the Number Two, to gain the right to move forward and challenge Number One, because of this, few people ever reach the mountain where "Number One" waits because the "Number Two" headband is constantly changing owners. Afro Samurai's father was the old Number One, until he was challenged by a gunman named "Justice" (who was then Number Two), who fought him in a duel to become the new Number One. At the time Justice challenged his father, Afro had only been a child (he has since been a teenager and is currently being an adult). Justice severed his father's head right in front of the young Afro. Now an adult, Afro Samurai is the current Number Two and a master swordsman; he travels the road seeking revenge on Justice, the current Number One. Lengthy flashbacks interspersed throughout the story detail how Afro rose from frightened boy fleeing the death of his father, to master swordsman, and eventually to become the current "Number Two", while the story in the present deals with the adult Afro making his way to the mountain top keep of the "Number One" to duel Justice, while at the same time the mysterious cult known as the "Empty Seven Clan" sends various agents to kill Afro and take his Number Two headband.[8]


Voiced by: Greg Eagles
Afro's father, Rokutaro, was the Number One at the beginning of the series, who lost his title and life to Justice when Justice decapitated him. How he attained the Number One headband, what he did during his time as Number One, and how long he'd had it prior to Justice killing him remains unclear. According to Justice, it was his intention to end the headband wars by hiding the Number One headband, but people kept fighting and killing each other to possess the other headbands. So Justice saw the only way to stop the fighting forever and to obtain ultimate power was to have all the headbands, but realized this only after killing Afro's Dad for the Number One and discarding the Number Two. Unlike Afro, who wears it simply as a headband, Afro's dad uses The Number One Headband as a hairband to tie back his afro in a large ponytail. In Afro Samurai Resurrection, Afro's Dad's skeleton is uncovered by a female warrior named Sio who intends to resurrect him to get revenge on Afro by having his father kill him. Afro's father is seen regenerating in a tube from a jawbone of his original skeleton by the technological expertise of Dharman. In the final stage of restoration, Sio interrupted it, leaving the mental recreation incomplete, thus he became a stronger, much more brutish version of his original self with ripped muscles and blood red eyes and a savage bloodlust. Sio then uses him to kill Afro and as a result of her final revenge, he succeeds and kills Afro. But this backfires when Jinno attacks him but ends up dying as well, and this triggers Sio to try to save her brother but dies by getting impaled by him. In the end, Afro himself gets resurrected by a jolt of electricity from Jinno's damaged circuits and realizes something important about his father when they communicated spiritually in Afro's dreams with Afro's father saying: "The number one kills or is killed, you don't have the luxury to choose whose blood you spill, take back your headband, fear not my son". Afro realizes that his real father died a long time ago and although his father's clone has his original voice, looks, and skills, he lacks his soul. Afro gives his father peace by killing his monstrous clone.

Okiku Voiced by: Kelly Hu
Otsuru Voiced by: Tara Strong
A young woman who specializes in the art of healing, Otsuru is an excellent cook and adores fireworks. She is the one who discovered Afro in the shrine after he lost the Number Two headband as a boy, and took him to Sword Master's dojo where he befriended Jinno. When she is introduced as "Okiku," she has once again found Afro in a near-death state (having been blown off a cliff by an RPG fired by Brother 6 and badly poisoned by an arrow in a fight with Soshun); she bandages him and takes him to her home to heal. She and Jinno survived the attack that was meant to claim the Number Two headband from Sword Master, and they were both saved by the Empty Seven Clan. Apparently, some time after the events at Sword Master's dojo, she became an agent working for Brother 1 of the Empty Seven Clan. She possesses the unique ability to siphon memories from people as they dream and did this to copy down Afro's sword style to be used to complete the Afro Droid. She was also supposed to kill him should the opportunity ever present itself, but she finds herself unable to after having sex with him. She remarks that she still thinks of him as the same innocent boy she knew so long ago, revealing to him that she is actually Otsuru. Brother 2 of the Empty Seven then kills her for failing to carry out her mission and betraying the Empty Seven. Otsuru apparently had a strong emotional effect on Afro as seen when in Episode five Afro calls out her name twice in his grief over the friends that he has lost.

Voiced by: Terrence C. Carson
A one-eyed samurai who housed orphans and trained them to become warriors. When a young Afro first approaches him about the headbands, he receives a beating and is told by Sword Master that wearing the headbands leads to a life of murder, saying "We are born men in order to live, not to kill". Afro asks about the headbands again at dojo graduation, after hearing a rumor about Sword Master holding the Number Two Headband. The two meet alone underneath the Bodhi Tree outside the dojo, where Sword Master tells Afro he meant to take the secret to his grave. He then tells Afro to make a decision: forget avenging his father's death and live a normal life, or walk the path of the Number Two. When a large group of thugs in search of the Number Two headband attacks the dojo, Sword Master fights them to show Afro just what it means to be Number Two. After the battle is over, with all the thugs and most of the students dead, he faces Afro telling him that he's chosen his path. After Afro charges at Sword Master in order to kill him to claim the Number Two Headband, Sword Master closes his eyes (eye) and is killed by Afro who takes the Number Two Headband.
The official site reveals that Sword Master was in fact a friend to Afro's father Rokutaro, which helps explain the basis for his advice and world view.

Voiced by: Jason Marsden
A teenage student of Sword Master, and a friend to both Afro and Jinno. He wears a pair of glasses which are held to the face by string, similar to those worn in feudal Japan and late dynastic China. Though he graduated from swordsman school at the same time as Afro and Jinno, his skills are apparently inferior to theirs (though he is seen killing two people in his final battle). He appears to be very eccentric as shown by his playful manner with his friends as well as telling his friends that he hopes to eat chicken cutlet for his final meal, much to their disbelief. During a flashback in the fourth episode, he is killed in the Midnight Battle Under The Bodhi Tree after being impaled from behind by one of the assassins targeting Sword Master.

Brothers 1, 3 & 5 Voiced by: Phil LaMarr
Brother 2 Voiced by: John DiMaggio
Brother 4 Voiced by: Terrence C. Carson
Brother 6 Voiced by: Greg Eagles
The Empty Seven (無無坊主) is a group of six monks who believe that attaining both ancient headbands will lead to immortality and godhood. They employ robots and mercenaries to do their dirty work, since the monks themselves have greatly inferior fighting skills when compared to Afro and Justice possibly due to their age difference. Brothers 1 through 5 look like identical wizened old men with long beards, dressed in robes with some other accessories:

Voiced by: Phil LaMarr (normal version), S. Scott Bullock (Director's Cut version)
Dharman is an insane cyborg scientist employed by the Empty Seven Clan to build their machine-ninja army and the Afro Droid. He also helped rebuild and heal Jinnosuke whom he considers his masterpiece, referring to him as his "Teddy Bear". His name comes from the fact that he closely resembles a Japanese Dharma doll. When Jinnosuke was defeated by Afro, it is likely that Dharman was the one who repaired and rebuilt him. He was assumed by many fans to be Brother #7, as indicated when Brother #1 refers to him as "brother," but the official site states that this is in fact not the case. He also does not like to think of himself as part of the group, referring to them in the third person in the second-to-last chapter. Dharman is seen in the movie working for Sio in her vicious plan to get revenge on Afro. Using advanced bio-technology, he is able to create a clone of Rokutaro from a jawbone that Sio had stolen from the warrior's grave. He also was responsible for turning Sio's foster family members Bin, Michael and Tomoe into cybernetic warriors. Dharman is aroused by Sio's seductive beauty and sadistic nature as she toys with him. When the resurrection process is complete and Rokutaro lives again, Dharman is killed by Sio, who stabs him with her sword for letting her henchmen fight Afro without her permission.

A semi-sentient robot copy of Afro created by the Empty Seven Clan (specifically their personal scientist, Dharman). It was created from combat data siphoned from Afro's mind by Okiku, and is able to reproduce all of his learned techniques and abilities. It is physically superior to Afro, and its external appearance is identical. The Afro Droid is also equipped with guns, lasers, and explosives. Afro eventually defeats Afro Droid in the third episode after the droid is impaled on its own sword following a sky-high, mid-air duel between the two, after which Afro destroys his memory chip and copied skills, thus stopping any more Afro Droids from being made.
The Afro Droid also has an ultimate weapon which carries sexual undertones. The very phallic shaped weapon is used against Afro during their fight and when fired the Afro Droid declares "That felt good" implying a form of ejaculation as the weapon reverts to a position that resembles a flaccid penis.

Voiced by: Yuri Lowenthal
A swordsman who wears a cybernetic teddy bear mask, the same design as Otsuru's teddy bear from their time as children in their dojo, earning him the nickname "Kuma," which means "Bear" in Japanese. He wears black keikogi and hakama, and his geta sandals have toe straps made of metal instead of cloth. Jinnosuke possesses great skill in wielding twin blades and is an old friend of Afro from his days at the dojo. Back then Jinno thought of Afro as a brother, but when Afro killed their master for the Number Two headband, Jinno vowed vengeance against him. His remaining eye constantly weeps, and under his robotic eye there appears to be a scar in the same position, due to the injuries (physical and greatly emotional) he suffered at the Midnight Battle Under the Bodhi Tree; he tells Afro that his tears have never stopped falling since that day. Jinno was rebuilt with cybernetic body modifications by the Empty Seven to "create a samurai of extreme power." Afro defeats him by destroying his life-support system, but it seems Kuma was again able to cheat death. He returns to challenge Afro years after the death of Justice, this time his body completely modified, appearing more android than human and virtually mummified in the other headbands from Justice's lair. At their second meeting, Jinno has also regained his teddy bear mask which smokes a cigarette. His Number Two covers the missing right eye; a mirror image of when Afro was recovering in the Sword Master's Dojo. Jinno appears in Afro Samurai - Resurrection with a motorcycle and works with Sio on her revenge plan. It is revealed that Sio is actually his blood sister who lived with foster parents when she was a child. Jinno was rebuilt several times due to the defeats from Afro, meaning that Jinno lost the fight at the end of season one. Because of the damages to his body, he is mute for most of the movie and is unable to communicate with his sister. Near the end of Resurrection, when Afro is near death, Jinno remembers his bonds of brotherhood with Afro and attempts to stop Rokutaro from killing Afro. However, he is killed along with Sio, and both die in each other's arms. Somehow, the electricity from Jinno's robotic body resuscitates Afro allowing him to continue the fight with Rokutaro's clone, eventually winning. With Dharman dead as well, it seems that Jinno will remain dead; however, in the final scene of the first season, he is shown confronting Afro on Mt. Shumi an unspecified number of years after the events of that season, having collected all the headbands and wearing a broken helmet. Given a number of hints in Resurrection - namely, that his helmet is not broken until the climax of the film, that he is never shown or explained to be collecting all the headbands, and that Afro does not go to live on Mt. Shumi until the end of the film - it would seem that Kuma may yet return in future, although given that Dharman is dead and Jinno seemingly finds peace in his final moments in Resurrection, the manner of his return is still open to speculation.

