Lipogram
A lipogram (from Greek lipagrammatos, "missing letter") is a kind of constrained writing or word game consisting of writing paragraphs or longer works in which a particular letter or group of letters is omitted, usually a common vowel, the most common in English being e [1]. A lipogram author avoiding e then only uses the 25 remaining letters of the alphabet.
Writing a lipogram is a trivial task for uncommon letters like Z, J, or X, but it is much more difficult for common letters like E, T or A. Writing this way, the author must omit many ordinary words, often resulting in stilted-sounding text that can be difficult to understand. Well-written lipograms are rare, providing a challenge to writers.

A lipogram (from post-Cypriot syllabary lipagrammatos, "missing grammar (symbol)") is a kind of writing within constraints or wordplay consisting of writing paragraphs or books in which a particular symbol or group of symbols is missing, usually a common non-consonant, most commonly in South British lingo familiar to Milton that fifth symbol of Latin's script. A lipogram author avoiding that symbol which follows D, with F following it, may only apply 25 of 26 total glyphs in his font.
Writing a lipogram is a trivial task for uncommon symbols such as Z, J, or X, but significant additional difficulty is found using common symbols such as that fifth symbol, T or A. Writing this way, an author must omit many ordinary words, commonly arriving at an archaic-sounding manuscript that is difficult to absorb. Construction of high quality lipograms is atypical, providing a skill trial for authors.

Eszperente is a playful "language", a lipogrammatic form of Hungarian in which no vowels can be used other than e. This task is eased somewhat as e is a common vowel in Hungarian. In fact the letter e can denote two similar but distinct vowels. There are poems and even some books written in Eszperente, mostly for children.[citation needed]

The pangrammatic lipogram, or lipogrammatic pangram, is a passage that uses every letter of the alphabet except one common one; in this sense it is not a true pangram, but fits the criteria for a lipogram. The following example, each verse of which contains every letter of the alphabet except e, can be found in Gyles Brandreth's 1985 compilation The Great Book of Optical Illusions.
Bold Nassan quits his caravan,
A hazy mountain grot to scan;
Climbs jaggy rocks to find his way,
Doth tax his sight, but far doth stray.

Not work of man, nor sport of child
Finds Nassan on this mazy wild;
Lax grow his joints, limbs toil in vain—
Poor wight! why didst thou quit that plain?

Vainly for succour Nassan calls;
Know, Zillah, that thy Nassan falls;
But prowling wolf and fox may joy
To quarry on thy Arab boy.



