Jumper (film)
Jumper is a 2008 science fiction film from 20th Century Fox and New Regency Productions. It is loosely based on the 1992 science fiction novel of the same name by Steven Gould. The film is directed by Doug Liman, director of The Bourne Identity and Mr. & Mrs. Smith, and stars Hayden Christensen, Samuel L. Jackson, Rachel Bilson, Jamie Bell, Max Thieriot, AnnaSophia Robb, and Diane Lane. The film follows a person capable of teleporting to any location as he is chased by a secret group intent on killing him.
The script went through a rewrite prior to filming and the roles for the main characters were changed during production. Jumper was filmed in 20 cities in 14 countries between 2006 and 2007. The film was released on February 14, 2008 and a soundtrack was released on February 19. The film held the first position in its opening weekend with $27.3 million, despite mostly negative reviews. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes recorded a 16% approval rating and 35/100 on Metacritic. Several novels were developed as tie-ins to the film along with a video game for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 2, and Wii consoles, named Jumper: Griffin's Story. The DVD was released on June 10, 2008, and both Christensen and Liman have spoken of one or more sequels.

The movie starts with a young David Rice (Thieriot), a 15-year-old student in Ann Arbor, Michigan, discovers he has the ability to "jump", teleporting to any location he has seen after falling into a frozen river while recovering a snow globe for Millie (Robb) that was thrown onto the river by school bully Mark (James). He decides to leave his alcoholic father, William (Rooker), his mother Mary (Lane), having left him when he was five, and goes to New York City, but before that he leaves the snow globe for Millie to symbolize that he is still alive. While in New York, he uses his power to rob a bank for funds. He repeats this many times over the years, sometimes leaving IOU notes as a joke. Eight years later, David (Christensen) lives a luxurious life from his penthouse apartment, its walls covered with pictures of places around the world which he "jumps" to on a daily basis. However, a lead from the bank robbery he did when he was 15 has finally led a man named Roland Cox (Jackson) to David, who knows of his ability and has the technology to disable him - electrified restraints. However, as Roland believes someone is protecting David, he hesitates in killing him long enough for David to escape. Roland tells his associates to be prepared at the various sites that David has on his walls.
David returns to Ann Arbor, and seeks out Millie (Bilson). During their conversation, Mark (Dunn) recognizes him and he and David get into a fight. Once out of sight of the onlookers, David teleports Mark to the bank vault in New York City, and returns. He invites Millie to join him on a trip to Rome, which she accepts. The two arrive in the city and sightsee. David uses his abilities to gain them access to the closed Colosseum, but runs into another Jumper, Griffin (Bell), who has been watching David for some time. Griffin explains that his flagrant jumping has attracted attention - two men who approach with weapons identical to Roland's. The ensuing battle displays both Griffin's Jumping talent and the hunters ability to sense Jumps, but Griffin is victorious, welcoming David to "the war" with a short explanation - the men are "Paladins", a secret society dedicated to killing Jumpers. Griffin has been fighting them for much of his life.
The battle has attracted attention, so David collects Millie and departs, but they are caught trespassing by the police, and David is put in jail. David's mother shortly arrives and helps David get free, telling him he has little time, but does not give David any time to ask questions. David goes to find Millie, who is highly suspicious of David's behavior, but he is unable to explain, and makes sure she is safely aboard a plane back to the United States while he goes to Griffin for further investigation.
At Griffin's desert lair, Griffin explains to David about the Paladins; they are fanatical religious fundamentalists who believe that Jumpers are an affront to God. They have been hunting Jumpers for centuries - Griffin attributes the Inquisition and witch hunts to them. Part of their method in hunting Jumpers is to target their loved ones as well; Griffin has been on a personal mission to kill them after they killed his parents.
David quickly jumps back to Ann Arbor to find his father mortally wounded; Roland had used the appearance of Mark in the bank vault to trace David to Ann Arbor. Realizing that Millie will not be safe when she lands, David asks for Griffin's help to meet her at the airport. However, they arrive to find that the plane landed an hour earlier; David jumps to Millie's apartment to find that Roland is waiting for him there. Before Roland can react, David grabs Millie and returns the two of them to Griffin's lair.
Griffin, who has been arming himself to fight Roland, is furious with David; the Paladins have a device that permits them to traverse the phenomena by which Jumpers teleport - David has just led Roland right to Griffin's lair. A battle ensues between the Jumpers and Paladins, but Griffin is able to drive the Paladins back to Millie's apartment with a flame thrower, though Millie has been captured as well. Griffin attempts to teleport a bomb to the apartment, but David tries to stop him; the two begin a world-spanning fight, but David eventually traps Griffin in a downed power transition tower in the middle of a firefight in Chechnya. As David leaves, Griffin claims that Jumpers don't have the ability to protect their loved ones - he will die if he attempts the rescue.
David jumps to Millie's apartment and is quickly caught by the Paladins. Risking his life, David manages to teleport the entire apartment to a nearby river, including Millie and the Paladins, but seemingly falls unconscious in the process. However, the couple are then teleported to the library where David made his first jump - along with Roland. David recovers first, grabs Roland and teleports him to a cave high above the Grand Canyon. Before departing, David tells Roland that he could have killed him, proving that he is not the abomination Roland believes him to be. Sometime later, David and Millie travel to Mary's home, and David learns that he has a sister named Sophie (Stewart), and that Mary herself was a Paladin; when David was five, he began jumping, so she left to avoid having to kill her own son. She asks him to leave, giving him a head start before she must hunt him down; David and Millie jump to an unknown location.



In November 2005, New Regency Productions hired director Doug Liman to helm the film adaptation of the science fiction novel Jumper by Steven Gould. Screenwriter Jim Uhls was hired to rewrite an adapted screenplay by David S. Goyer.[2] However, Liman desired another rewrite and Simon Kinberg assisted in completing the script.[2] Liman spoke on using the novel for developing the script: "This is 100% Steven Gould's story, it's just reinvented as a movie."[3] In an interview with Steven Gould, he revealed that he approved of the deviations from the novel.[3] Before filming was to begin, the studio announced plans to develop a trilogy based on the novel's premise.[4]
Liman's changes to the story, particularly the transformation of the various terrorists David confronts in the book into the fundamentalist Paladins, was inspired by Jon Krakauer's Under the Banner of Heaven. Liman describes his visualization of the Paladins thus; "someone that gets a message from God to kill his younger brother's wife. Because she is, in real life, trying to stop him from practicing polygamy. He gets a revelation from God that he should kill her. These brothers deal with killing in the name of God. He kills this woman and goes to court. And it is asked, can you be found not guilty for reasons of insanity? Because God spoke to you and said, "Kill." Does God talking to you mean that you are insane? Then half the planet's insane. I find that particular conversation so fascinating. I am interested in someone that thinks they should kill in the name of God. How do you actually convince that person not to kill?"[5]
While other films tend to use only one storyboard artist, Jumper required six artists who each worked on an individual action sequence. The artists were given specific instruction on the rules of the teleportation used in the film, to ensure accuracy in the storyboarding. One artist reflected on the instructions: "I was just thinking, 'How would a guy that can teleport fight?' So you were really pushing yourself to try to think of inventive, cool, spectacular ways that you could use this jumping talent that these characters have."[6]

In April 2006, actors Tom Sturridge, Teresa Palmer, and Jamie Bell were cast for Jumper with Sturridge in the lead role (who won the role over Heath Ledger, Devon Sawa, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and Jared Padalecki).[7] The following July, actor Samuel L. Jackson was cast into Jumper as an NSA agent, with producer Simon Kinberg rewriting the original screenplay draft by Goyer. Principal photography was scheduled to take place in Tokyo, Rome, Toronto, and New York.[8] Production was stopped in June 2006 after producer Tom Rothman told Liman "The lead is 18. Wouldn't the movie be better if he was 25? You have a huge movie here and adults won't go and see an 18-year-old. They'll consider it a children's movie. You could make a bigger movie than that."[9] Liman agreed on casting older actors for furthering the romantic aspect of the film.[10] In August, actor Hayden Christensen replaced Sturridge in the lead role as David just two weeks before the beginning of shooting, as the studio "became concerned about not having a more prominent actor in their trio of young stars."[11] Rapper Eminem was also considered for the role.[12] After Christensen was recast for the lead role, Liman replaced Palmer with Rachel Bilson.[9]

—Hayden Christensen, reflecting on filming in the Colosseum[10]
In September 2006, Jumper was filmed at various locations in Peterborough, Ontario and principal photography began in Toronto in October.[2][13][14] In December 2006, Liman negotiated with the Rome Film Commission for rare access to film for three days in the Colosseum. The scene in the Colosseum was originally written for the Pantheon, at which exterior shots were also filmed. The crew was required to keep equipment off the ground by using harnesses and had to rely on natural light for filming.[15] Filming took place for 45 minutes in the morning and in the evening so as not to disturb the public touring the amphitheater throughout the day.[16] In order to maximize the short period for filming, four steadicams were set up to ensure time was not wasted in reloading the camera.[9] A visual effects supervisor explained how visual effects were needed for various aspects after filming: "There were three kinds of shots: there were shots where they were able to get most of what they needed in the Coliseum itself; and then there were shots on a set that needed extensions beyond the limits of the set; and then there were shots where we needed to create the Coliseum basically from scratch."[17]
After filming in Rome, scenes were filmed in Toronto during December 2006 to January 2007 and wrapped at the Canadian location on January 19. On January 26 in Toronto, 56-year-old David Ritchie, a set dresser, was fatally struck by frozen debris while dismantling an outdoor set in wintry conditions.[2][18] Another worker was injured and was sent to a hospital with serious head and shoulder injuries.[19] After Toronto, the cast and crew traveled to Tokyo to film scenes. One scene required over 30 shoots as the scene could only be filmed in between traffic light changes.[9] As a result of director Liman insisting Christensen perform his own stunts, the actor injured his hand, split open his ear, and developed a hyperdilated pupil that required hospital care while filming various scenes.[10][20]
In February 2007, the next filming site was set up at Gallup Park in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Sixty students from the nearby Huron High School were cast as extras for the film.[21] Since additional filming was required of the area, twenty other students were used for a day of filming in September.[22] Altogether, filming took place in 20 cities in 14 countries.[23]
In interviews that followed the release of film (as well as some of the featurettes on the DVD), Jamie Bell was critical of the finished product, stating that he felt it had become "sugar coated" and too many people had worked on it in order to make it a money-spinner. He also described his frustration whilst they were shooting the film.[24]

The New Zealand visual effects studio Weta Digital was initially selected to assist in creating a preview clip for the 2007 Comic-Con Convention.[17] The studio's 100 employees later developed the visual effects for 300 of the 600 shots in the film.[10][17][25] In total, there are more than 100 jumps in the film, and each jump was modified based on the distance and location the character(s) jumped.[26] The jumps were developed using Nuke and Shake.[17] Many of the shots, including those of Big Ben and the Sphinx were created using the program Maya.[26] Weta's VFX supervisor Erik Winquist explained how the visual effects of the jumps were created: "The concept of what a jump looks like changed and evolved a little over the course of post production. There are shots in the film that use still array footage but not in the same way that we saw in The Matrix. The Matrix was largely about stopping time whereas this was about using slow shutter speeds on those still array cameras to end up with a streaky motion-blurred image as the perspective was changing, which is a pretty interesting look."[26] Other visual effects studios that assisted with the film include Hydraulx, Digital Domain, and Pixel Magic.[17]

The film received widespread criticism and poor reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes reported that 16% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 150 reviews — the consensus was "An erratic action pic with little coherence and lackluster special effects."[27] Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 35 out of 100, based on 36 reviews.[28] Austin Chronicle's Marc Salov called the film "...pretty slick, entertaining stuff, well-crafted by Liman, edited into a tight, action-packed bundle of nerviness."[29] Edward Douglas of ComingSoon.net gave the film a positive review: "An impressive feat as a vehicle for Doug Liman to pull out the stops with some of the most jaw-dropping stunts shot in some of the most amazing locations on earth."[30] Jules Brenner of Cinema Signals gave the film a negative review, stating "...by mid way, you wish the jumper were you. Teleporting yourself to the outer lobby would be far enough."[31] Dustin Putman of www.TheMovieBoy.com also presented a negative review of the film, "With no one to root for, no adequate story development, and action scenes that are the epitome of underwhelming, Jumper is a lost cause."[32]

The film was released Thursday, February 14, 2008 in the United States and Canada, in the hopes of pulling in business on Valentine's Day.[33] The film was targeted at an audience of both males and females below the age of 25.[1] Jumper grossed $27.3 million on 4,600 screens in 3,428 theaters from Friday to Sunday, ranking first for the weekend at the box office.[1][34] In its first weekend, the film set the record for the largest February release in Korea and had the first place position in 11 of the 30 markets it was released in.[35] For the first two weekends of its release, the film maintained its number one position in international markets, while slipping to the second position in the United States to the release of Vantage Point.[36] As of September 16, 2008, its worldwide gross is $222,008,155 with $80,172,128 from the domestic box office and $141,836,027 from foreign markets.[37] It was the twentieth highest grossing film worldwide for 2008.[38]

Steven Gould, the author of Jumper and Reflex also wrote Jumper: Griffin's Story as a tie-in for the film. The novel, released on August 21, 2007, focuses on the character Griffin which was created by screenwriter David Goyer specifically for the film. Because Griffin had not appeared in the two prior novels, Gould developed Jumper: Griffin's Story as a backstory of the character's early childhood before the film. When writing the novel, Gould had to work closely with a producer of the film to ensure that the story did not conflict with the film's premise.[39]
Oni Press released a graphic novel that portrays s
