Introduction to quantum mechanics
Mathematical formulation of...
Measurement · Uncertainty
Exclusion · Duality
Decoherence · Ehrenfest theorem · Tunneling
Quantum mechanics (QM, or quantum theory) is a branch of physics dealing with the behavior of matter and energy on the minute scale of atoms and subatomic particles. Quantum mechanics is fundamental to our understanding of all of the fundamental forces of nature except gravity.
Quantum mechanics is the foundation of several branches of physics, including electromagnetism, particle physics, condensed matter physics, and even parts of cosmology. Quantum mechanics is also essential to the theory of chemical bonding (and hence all of chemistry), structural biology, and technologies such as electronics, information technology, and nanotechnology. A century of experiments and of work in applied science has proved quantum mechanics successful and practical.
Quantum mechanics began in the early 20th century, with the pathbreaking work of Max Planck and Niels Bohr. Max Born coined the term "quantum mechanics" in 1924. The wider physics community soon accepted quantum mechanics because of its highly accurate empirical predictions, especially in systems where Newtonian mechanics fails. A major early success of quantum mechanics was its explanation of wave-particle duality, namely of how subatomic particles have wave-like properties and waves have particle-like properties. Quantum mechanics also applies to a wider range of situations than general relativity does, e.g., to systems whose scale is atomic or smaller, and to those having very low or very high energies or subjected to the lowest temperatures.


In the late 19th century, classical physics appeared to some as nearly complete, but this perception was challenged by empirical findings that such physics could not explain. Physical theories that worked very well for situations on the human scale in space and time failed to explain situations that were very small, very massive, or that moved at very high velocities. A view of the universe that had, by and large, distilled commonplace observations was challenged by observations and theories that predicted correctly where classical physics had given impossible results. But the emerging picture was of a universe that stubbornly refused to behave in a way that agreed with human common sense.
On the large end of the scale, relativity theory said that time does not pass at the same rate for all observers, that matter can convert to energy and vice-versa, that two objects each moving at more than half the speed of light cannot approach each other at a speed exceeding the speed of light, that time progresses more slowly near massive objects, etc. Things just did not work in a way that experience with scales, rulers, and clocks here on earth had led humans to expect.
In the small, the wonders were even more abundant. A photon or electron has neither a location nor a traceable trajectory between the point where it is emitted and the point where it is detected. The points where such a particle may be detected are not where one would expect them to be based on everyday experience. With a small probability, the detection point can even be on the other side of a solid barrier. Probability turns out to be a highly salient factor in all interactions on this scale. The trajectory of any atomic scale object is "squishy" in the sense that any measurement that makes an object's position more precise reduces the precision with which we can observe its velocity, and vice-versa.
In the era of classical physics, Newton and his followers believed that light consisted of a stream of particles, and others believed that light consisted of waves propagating through some medium. Rather than finding an experiment that would prove one or the other side correct, physicists discovered that an experiment designed to show light's frequency or other wave "characteristics" will manifest light's "wave nature," while an experiment designed to show its momentum or other particle "characteristics" will reveal light's "particle nature." Furthermore, objects as large as atoms, and even some molecules, have revealed a "wave nature" when observed in the appropriate way.
The most eminent of physicists have warned that if an explanation of quantum physics "makes sense", then that explanation is very likely to be flawed.[citation needed] In 1927 Niels Bohr wrote: "Anyone who is not shocked by quantum theory does not understand it."

The foundations of quantum mechanics (QM) arguably began with the earliest work on the properties of light, in the 17th century, and the discovery of the properties of electricity and magnetism, early in the 19th century. In 1690, Christiaan Huygens employed a wave theory to explain the reflection and refraction of light.[1] Isaac Newton believed that light consisted of infinitesimally small particles which he called "corpuscles." In 1827, Thomas Young and Augustin Fresnel conducted experiments on light interference that found results that were inconsistent with a corpuscular theory of light. All theoretical and empirical results through the late 19th century seemed inconsistent with Newton's corpuscular theory of light.
Later experiments identified phenomena, such as the photoelectric effect, that were consistent only with a packet or "quantum" model of light. When light strikes an electrical conductor, electrons seem to move away from their original positions. These observations can only be explained by assuming that light delivers energy in definite packets. In a photoelectric device such as the light meter in a camera, light hitting the metallic detector causes electrons to move. Increasing the intensity of light having a single frequency will cause more electrons to move. But making the electrons move faster requires increasing the frequency of the light. Thus the intensity of light controls the electric current flowing through the circuit, while its frequency controls the circuit's voltage. These observations contradicted the wave model of light derived from the study of sound waves and ocean waves, where the intensity of the initial impulse sufficed to predict the energy of the resulting wave. In the case of light, energy was solely a function of frequency, a fact which begged for an explanation. It was also necessary to reconcile experiments showing the particle nature of light with other experiments revealing its wave nature.
In 1874, George Johnstone Stoney was the first to propose that a physical quantity, namely electric charge, could not vary by less than some irreducible amount. Thus electric charge was the first physical quantity to be theoretically quantized. In 1873, James Clerk Maxwell showed theoretically that an oscillating electrical circuit should produce electromagnetic waves. Given Maxwell's equations, it was possible to calculate the speed of electromagnetic radiation purely from electrical and magnetic measurements, and the calculated value corresponded very closely to the measured speed of light.[2] In 1888, Heinrich Hertz made an electrical device that produced radiation whose frequency was lower than that of visible light, radiation we would now call microwaves.[3] Early researchers differed in how they explained the fundamental nature of what we now call electromagnetic radiation, some maintaining that it is composed of particles, while others asserted that it is a wave phenomenon. In classical physics, these ideas are mutually exclusive.
QM formally began with Max Planck's landmark 1900 paper on black body radiation,[4] marking the first appearance of the quantum hypothesis. Planck's work made clear that neither the wave nor the particle model can explain electromagnetic radiation. In 1905, Albert Einstein extended Planck's theory to explain the photoelectric effect.[5] In 1913, Niels Bohr set out his theory of the atom, one incorporating Planck's quantum hypothesis in an essential way.[6] This and other early 20th century work makes up the "old quantum theory."
In 1924, Louis de Broglie posited the matter-wave hypothesis. This hypothesis proved to be a turning point, and quickly led to a more sophisticated and complete variant of QM.[7] Important contributors in the mid-1920s to what came to be called the "new quantum mechanics" or "new physics" were Max Born,[8] Paul Dirac,[9] Werner Heisenberg,[10] Wolfgang Pauli,[11] and Erwin Schrödinger.[12] In the late 1940s and early 1950s, Julian Schwinger, Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, Richard Feynman, and Freeman Dyson discovered quantum electrodynamics, which significantly advanced our understanding of the quantum theory of electromagnetism and the electron. Later, Murray Gell-Mann developed a related theory of the strong force, called quantum chromodynamics.

When white light passes through a prism, or the bevelled edge of a mirror or a tapered pane of glass, or through drops of rain to form a rainbow, the white light is decomposed into a spectrum. This spectrum reveals that white light is composed of light of all colours and hence of all frequencies.
When a sample composed of a pure chemical element emits light by heating or other agency, the spectrum of the emitted light, called the emission spectrum, is peculiar to that element and the temperature to which it is heated. Unlike the spectrum of white light, an emission spectrum is not a wide band composed of all the colours from indigo to red, but instead consists of narrow bands, each of a single colour and separated from other bands by darkness. Such a display is called a line spectrum. An emission spectrum can also contain lines outside the range of visible light, detectable only by special photographic film or electronic devices.
It was hypothesized that an atom emits electromagnetic radiation the way a violin string "radiates" sound – not only with a fundamental frequency (in which the entire string moves the same way at once), but also with higher harmonics (formed when the string divides itself into halves and other divisions that vibrate in coordination with each other as when one half of the string is going one way as the other half of the string is going the opposite way). A mathematical description of the line spectrum of an element proved elusive until 1885, when Johann Jakob Balmer proposed the following simple formula to describe the line spectrum of atomic hydrogen:
where λ is wavelength, R is the Rydberg constant, and n is an integer > 2. This formula can be generalized to apply to atoms other than hydrogen, a fact that will not detain us, except to note that this is the reason why the denominator in the first fraction is expressed as a square.
The next development was Pieter Zeeman's discovery of the Zeeman effect, whose physical explanation was worked out by Hendrik Antoon Lorentz. Lorentz hypothesized that the line spectrum of hydrogen resulted from vibrating electrons. It is possible to obtain information about what goes on within the atom, because moving electrons create a magnetic field. Hence an electron can be influenced by an external magnetic field, similar to the way that an iron magnet will attract or repel another magnet.
The Zeeman effect could be interpreted to mean that the line spectrum results from electrons vibrating in their orbits, but classical physics could not explain why an electron does not spiral into the nucleus, nor why electron orbits have the properties required to produce observed line spectra, describable by Balmer's formula. More pointedly, why do electrons behave in such a way that emission spectra are not continuous but instead are line spectra?

Quantum mechanics grew out of the spectroscopic study of electromagnetic waves. The most familiar form of such waves is visible light. Other forms can be more energetic than light, such as ultraviolet light, x-rays, and gamma rays. Forms that are less energetic (and thus have longer wavelengths) than light include infrared waves, microwaves, and radio waves. All electromagnetic waves propagate in a vacuum at the speed of light. Henceforth, "particle" always refers to elementary or subatomic particles.

Classical physics predicted that a black-body radiator would emit an infinite amount of energy. Not only was this prediction absurd, but the observed emission spectrum of a black-body rose from zero at one end, peaked at a frequency related to the temperature of the radiator, and then declined to zero. In 1900, Max Planck developed an empirical equation that could account for the observed emission spectra of black bodies, but could not reconcile that equation with classical physics. He concluded that, contrary to what was generally believed at the time, classical physics does not apply on the microscopic scale.
Planck's theory allowed all possible frequencies and wavelengths, while restricting the energy delivered. "In classical physics,... the energy of a given oscillator depends merely on its amplitude, and this amplitude is subject to no restriction."[13] Planck's theory also concluded that the energy emitted by a radiator is strictly proportional to its frequency, and the higher the frequency, the greater the energy. To reach this conclusion, he postulated that a radiating macroscopic body consisted of an enormous number of elementary oscillators, each vibrating at some frequency between zero and infinity. (It was later confirmed that these elem
