Super Sentai
The Super Sentai Series (スーパー戦隊シリーズ ,Sūpā Sentai Shirīzu?) is the name given to the long running Japanese superhero team genre of shows produced by Toei Company Ltd., Toei Agency and Bandai, and aired by TV Asahi ("Super" refers to their use of mecha, and "sentai" is the Japanese word for "task force" or, literally, "fighting squadron" and was also a term used for Japanese squadrons in WWII). The shows are of the tokusatsu genre, featuring live action characters and colorful special effects, and are aimed mainly at children. This series is one of the most prominent tokusatsu productions in Japan, alongside the Ultra Series, the Kamen Rider Series, and the Metal Hero Series and was adapted in the United States as Power Rangers.

In every Sentai series, the fight between good and evil is illustrated, with the good side winning most of the time. The basic premise of the series is that a group of five (in some cases fewer) people gain special powers (magical or technological), wear colored outfits, and use advanced weapons and martial arts skills to battle powerful beings from other planets and/or dimensions threatening to take over the Earth. In most of the episodes, after the team has beaten an army of evil creatures ("grunts") and the "monster of the week", they call for huge robotic vehicles/animals ("mechas") that can combine to form one giant robot to fight an enlarged version of the monster. Sentai series with the giant robot element are specifically known as Super Sentai. Each Sentai series is set in a different fictional universe, with the exception of specials that feature a teaming up with the previous Sentai.
The first Sentai series, Himitsu Sentai Goranger, was created by the late Shotaro Ishinomori, creator of Kamen Rider and Cyborg 009 in 1975. He did not create any further Sentai series after his second, J.A.K.Q. Dengekitai, was not received well. These two series were not a part of the Super Sentai series until 1994 when Toei decided to include them with the series that followed.
The third Sentai series, Battle Fever J (1979), is the first Super Sentai show (on account of it being the first to have a giant robot that the heroes pilot - the past two shows only had vehicles).
The term sentai is also occasionally used to describe shows with similar premises, such as Voltron, or even the magical girl team in Sailor Moon, as Naoko Takeuchi deliberately used Sentai ideas.[1] In 2003, Sailor Moon was retold in a fashion somewhat similar to Sentai shows in the form of Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon. While not officially Sentai, some fans of the genre have accepted it as such.

Although the series originated in Japan, they were imported and dubbed in several other countries. Choudenshi Bioman and Hikari Sentai Maskman were very popular in France and in the Philippines in the 1980s.[2] Additionally, Choujuu Sentai Liveman and Kousoku Sentai Turboranger were aired in Spain and Portugal. Denshi Sentai Denziman and Dai Sentai Goggle V were aired in Italy. In Brazil, the first Super Sentai series to air was Dengeki Sentai Changeman, in 1988, and made a tremendous impact at the time, being considered a cult classic. Due to the success of Changeman, other series were imported, such as Choushinsei Flashman, Hikari Sentai Maskman and the unsuccessful Dai Sentai Goggle V. There were also plans to import newer series, but were cancelled due to reduced popularity of recent series. Various Sentai series were also broadcast in Malaysia sometime in the 1990s.

After Honolulu, Hawaii's KIKU-TV had success with Android Kikaider (called Kikaida) and Kamen Rider V3 in the 1970s, multiple Super Sentai shows, including Himitsu Sentai Goranger and Battle Fever J, were brought to the Hawaiian market (all broadcast in Japanese with English subtitles by JN Productions).[3] Himitsu Sentai Goranger was also broadcast on Japanese-language stations in Sacramento, San Francisco and Los Angeles, California in 1976–77. J.A.K.Q. Dengekitai was also broadcast in Los Angeles, California following Himitsu Sentai Goranger. Kagaku Sentai Dynaman was dubbed and aired as a parody on the USA Network television show Night Flight in 1987. In 1993, Haim Saban produced the first installment of the Power Rangers franchise by dubbing the action sequences from 1992's Kyōryū Sentai Zyuranger and filming new footage with American actors for the story sequences. This trend has continued, with each successive Sentai show contributing the action sequences to the Power Rangers series the following year.[4]

Super Sentai has also been broadcast in South Korea dubbed from Japanese to Korean, starting as early as Choushinsei Flashman titled Earth Protector Flashman. Recently, Tooniverse, JEI-TV, CHAMP TV/ANIONE TV, and Cartoon Network Korea have broadcast Bakuryuu Sentai Abaranger, Tokusou Sentai Dekaranger, Mahou Sentai Magiranger, GoGo Sentai Boukenger and Juken Sentai Gekiranger under the titles of Power Rangers: Dino Thunder, S.P.D., Magic Force, Treasure Force and Wild Spirits, respectively.[5]

Each of the series of Super Sentai has their own unique values and motifs.
