Sharia
Part of a series on 
Islam
Allah†¬∑ Oneness of God
Muhammad†¬∑ Other prophets
Profession of faith†¬∑ Prayer
Fasting†¬∑ Charity†¬∑ Pilgrimage
Texts and laws
Qur'an†¬∑ Sunnah†¬∑ Hadith
Fiqh†¬∑ Sharia†¬∑ Kalam†¬∑ Sufism
History and leadership
Timeline of Muslim history
Ahl al-Bayt†¬∑ Sahaba
Sunni†¬∑ Shi'a
Rashidun†¬∑ Shi'a imams
Culture and society
Academics†¬∑ Animals†¬∑ Art
Calendar†¬∑ Children
Demographics†¬∑ Festivals
Mosques†¬∑ Philosophy
Science†¬∑ Women
Politics†¬∑ Dawah
Islam and other religions
Christianity†¬∑ Judaism
Hinduism†¬∑ Sikhism†¬∑ Jainism
See also
Criticism†¬∑†Islamophobia
Glossary of Islamic terms
Islam portal
†v†‚Ä¢†d†‚Ä¢†e†

Sharia (Arabic: '‚Äéÿ¥ÿ±Ÿäÿπÿ© transliteration: ≈†arƒ´ øah) is the body of Islamic religious law. The term means "way" or "path to the water source"; it is the legal framework within which the public and private aspects of life are regulated for those living in a legal system based on Islamic principles of jurisprudence and for Muslims living outside the domain. Sharia deals with many aspects of day-to-day life, including politics, economics, banking, business, contracts, family, sexuality, hygiene, and social issues.
Before the 19th century, legal theory was considered the domain of the traditional legal schools of thought. Most Sunni Muslims follow Hanafi, Hanbali, Maliki or Shafii, while most Shia Muslims, the Twelvers, follow the Jaafari school of thought.[1]
Islamic law is now the most widely used religious law, and one of the three most common legal systems of the world alongside common law and civil law.[2] During the Islamic Golden Age, classical Islamic law may have influenced the development of common law,[3] and also influenced the development of several civil law institutions.[4]

The term sharia itself derives from the verb "shara'a" (Arabic: ÿ¥ÿ±ÿπ‚Äé), which according to Abdul Mannan Omar's "Dictionary of the Holy Qur'an" connects to the idea of "system of divine law; way of belief and practice".[Qur'an†45:18]
Legal scholar L. Ali Khan explains that "the concept of sharia has been thoroughly confused in legal and common literature. For some Muslims, sharia consists of the Qur'an and Sunnah. For others, it also includes classical fiqh. Most encyclopedias define sharia as law based upon the Qur'an, the Sunna, and classical fiqh derived from consensus (ijma) and analogy (qiyas).This definition of sharia inappropriately lumps together the revealed with the unrevealed. This blending of sources has created a muddled assumption that scholarly interpretations are as sacred and beyond revision as are the Qur'an and the Sunnah. The Qur'an and the Sunnah constitute the immutable Basic Code, which should be kept separate from ever-evolving interpretive law (fiqh). This analytical separation between the Basic Code and fiqh is necessary to" dissipate confusion around the term Sharia.[5]

Sharia has been defined as
Mainstream Islam distinguishes between fiqh (deep understanding, discernment), which refers to the inferences drawn by scholars, and sharia, which refers to the principles that lie behind the fiqh. Scholars hope that fiqh (jurisprudence) and sharia (law) are in harmony in any given case, but they cannot be sure.
Sharia has certain laws which are regarded as divinely ordained, concrete and timeless for all relevant situations (for example, the ban against drinking liquor as an intoxicant). It also has certain laws which derived from principles established by Islamic lawyers
The primary sources of Islamic law are the Qur'an and Sunnah.
To this traditional Sunni Muslims add the consensus (ijma) of Muhammad's companions (sahaba) and Islamic jurists (ulema) on certain issues, and drawing analogy from the essence of divine principles and preceding rulings (qiyas). In situations where no concrete rules exist under the sources, law scholars use qiyas ‚Äî various forms of reasoning, including by analogy. The consensus of the community or people, public interest, and others are also accepted as secondary sources where the first four primary sources allow.[citation needed]
Shi'a Muslims reject this approach. They strongly reject analogy (qiyas) as an easy way to innovations (bid'ah), and also reject consensus (ijma) as having any particular value in its own. During the period that the Sunni scholars developed those two tools, the Shi'a Imams were alive, and Shi'a view them as an extension of the Sunnah, so they view themselves as only deriving their laws (fiqh) from the Qur'an and Sunnah. A recurring theme in Shi'a jurisprudence is logic (mantiq),[11] something Shi'a believe they mention, employ and value to a higher degree than Sunnis do. They do not view logic as a third source for laws, rather a way to see if the derived work is compatible with the Qur'an and Sunnah.
In Imami-Shi'i law, the sources of law (usul al-fiqh) are the Qur'an, anecdotes of Muhammad's practices and those of the 12 Imams, and the intellect (aql). The practices called Sharia today, however, also have roots in local customs (al-urf).[citation needed]

The formative period of Islamic jurisprudence stretches back to the time of the early Muslim communities. In this period, jurists were more concerned with pragmatic issues of authority and teaching than with theory.[12] Progress in theory happened with the coming of the early Muslim jurist Muhammad ibn Idris ash-Shafi`i (767-820), who laid down the basic principles of Islamic jurisprudence in his book ar-RisƒÅlah. The book details the four roots of law (Qur'an, Sunnah, ijma, and qiyas) while specifying that the primary Islamic texts (the Qur'an and the hadith) be understood according to objective rules of interpretation derived from careful study of the Arabic language.[13]
A number of important legal concepts and institutions were developed by Islamic jurists during the classical period of Islam, known as the Islamic Golden Age, dated from the 7th to 13th centuries.[3][4][14][15]

At the heart of Islamic law lies the teachings of Allah and the acts and sayings of His Prophet, Muhammad;[16] therefore, sharia, Islamic law, is founded on the Qur'an and the Sunnah. However, sharia was not fully developed at the time of Muhammad's death, but rather it evolved around the Muslim community or Ummah through which it would serve.[citation needed]
When sharia began its formation in the deserts of Arabia about 1,400 years ago, the time Islam was born,[17] a sense of community did not exist. Life in the desert was nomadic and tribal, thus the only factor that tied people together into various tribes was through common ancestry.[16] However, the nature of Islam challenged that ideology and brought all those who professed their submission to Islam into the Ummah. Additionally, Islam was not just a religion but a way of life that transformed those who were once enemies into neighbors. Laws had to be instilled so the doctrines of sharia took root. All who are Muslim are judged by sharia[18] ‚Äì regardless of the location or the culture.
However, people do not change overnight nor do their habits of everyday life ‚Äì sharia was indeed guided through its development by lifestyles of the tribes in which was initially absorbed into Islam. Thus, through the understandings of the tribe, Islamic law would be a law of the community ‚Äì for the community by the community ‚Äì even if initially proposed by an individual ‚Äúfor they could not form part of the tribal law unless and until they were generally accepted as such.‚Äù[16] Additionally, Noel James Coulson, Lecturer in Islamic Law of the University of London, states that ‚Äúto the tribe as a whole belonged the power to determine the standards by which its members should live. But here the tribe is conceived not merely as the group of its present representatives but as a historical entity embracing past, present, and future generations.‚Äù[16] So, while ‚Äúeach and every law must be rooted in either the Quran or the Sunna,‚Äù[19] without contradiction, tribal life brought about a sense of participation. Such participation is further reinforced by Muhammad who stated, ‚ÄúMy community will never agree in error‚Äù[19] and thus, later recorded as a hadith.
After the death of Muhammad sharia continued to undergo fundamental changes, beginning with the reigns of caliphs Abu Bakr (632‚Äì34) and Umar (634‚Äì44) in which many decision making matters were brought to the attention of the Prophet's closest comrades for consultation.[17] In AD 662, during the reign of Mu'awiya b. Abu Sufyan, life ceased to be nomadic and undertook an urban transformation which in turn created matters not originally covered by Islamic law.[17] Each and every gain, loss, and turn of Islamic society has played an active role in developing sharia which branches out into fiqh and Qanun respectively.

The methodology of legal precedent and reasoning by analogy (Qiyas) used in Islamic law was similar to that of the common law legal system.[14] According to Justice Gamal Moursi Badr, Islamic law is like common law in that it "is not a written law" and the "provisions of Islamic law are to be sought first and foremost in the teachings of the authoritative jurists" (Ulema), hence Islamic law may "be called a lawyer's law if common law is a judge's law."[4]

Since the publication of legal scholar John Makdisi's "The Islamic Origins of the Common Law" in the North Carolina Law Review in 1999,[3] there has been controversy over whether English common law was inspired by medieval Islamic law.[20][21] It has been suggested by several scholars such as Professor John Makdisi, Jamila Hussain and Lawrence Rosen[22] that several fundamental English common law institutions may have been derived or adapted from similar legal institutions in Islamic law and jurisprudence, and introduced to England after the Norman conquest of England by the Normans, who conquered and inherited the Islamic legal administration of the Emirate of Sicily (see Arab-Norman culture), and "through the close connection between the Norman kingdoms of Roger II in Sicily ‚Äî ruling over a conquered Islamic administration ‚Äî and Henry II in England."[22] and also by Crusaders during the Crusades. The connection with Norman law in Normandy may be real, but it should be remembered that common law owes a great deal to Anglo-Saxon traditions and forms, and in its current form represents an interplay between the two systems.
According to Makdisi, the "royal English contract protected by the action of debt is identified with the Islamic Aqd, the English assize of novel disseisin is identified with the Islamic Istihqaq, and the English jury is identifi
