Fahrenheit (video game)
Fahrenheit (also known as Indigo Prophecy in North America) is a video game developed by Quantic Dream and published by Atari. The game was released in September 2005, and was written and directed by Quantic Dream founder David Cage.
According to the official Quantic Dream website, Fahrenheit has sold over 800,000 units worldwide since it was released.

In this paranormal thriller, New York City is stunned by a series of mysterious murders that follow the same pattern: ordinary people become possessed and kill absolute strangers in public. In this video game, the main male character must uncover the supernatural forces behind his crime.
A good deal of publicity was generated from the developer's rejection of conventional game genre labeling for the title; Quantic Dream prefers to brand it as the first truly "interactive film" rather than an adventure or third-person action title. This game features a large amount of motion captured animation as well as branching story lines, split screen cameras (used in a manner very similar to the television series 24) and an interface designed to be intuitive and realistic. Event triggers in the game are also mainly time-based, as opposed to the more common player-initiated progression found in most games. A majority of critical reviews were enthusiastic, and considerable praise has been given to the developers for their attempt to reinvent and re-imagine the "adventure game" genre. However, they also mentioned the bizarre plot twists and the seemingly rushed non-sensical nature of the second half of the game.

Console versions of the game eschew most of the traditional methods of control, making minimal use of the face buttons on the controller, instead using twin analog sticks for all player actions. The left stick controls movement of the character, and the right is used for context-sensitive actions. For instance, when Lucas approaches his table at the diner in the opening scene, one direction may cause him to take a seat, while another makes him examine his bill, and a third lets him pick up his drink and take a sip. The available options are displayed with simple diagrams at the top of the screen. Some more complex motions, such as climbing a fence or spinning a yo-yo in "around the world" fashion, require controller motions akin to those used for special moves from conventional fighting games.
During the tutorial of the game director David Cage instructs the player to move the thumb-stick slowly when opening a door, to maximize immersion, making it clear the prevalent use of thumb-sticks in the game was intended to increase immersion. The rare occasion in which the face buttons are used never directly control character actions, rather, the buttons (the Y, B, and A, or triangle, O and X, on Xbox and PS2, respectively) are used to interact with menus and user interface.
This includes changing between characters, navigating menus in computer systems, and displaying the "mental health" of the character. On the PC the game can be controlled by keyboard and mouse, with key movements and mouse gestures used in conjunction in lieu of analog control sticks, but Windows gamepads with analog sticks are also supported, and recommended.
There are also large action set pieces, which are completely scripted, but do require reflexes to complete. During these scenes, two circular diagrams with colored segments (resembling the electronic Simon game) are superimposed over the full-motion animation, each one corresponding to one of the analog sticks. The diagrams depict sequences of control inputs, which the player must mimic in order to maneuver the character out of danger. It is similar to the game-play of Dragon's Lair or the Quick Time Event sequences in Shenmue.
The game also requires feats of endurance, involving the alternate pressing of the left and right shoulder buttons as rapidly as possible. These L-trigger/R-trigger sequences are generally used to evoke (and cause) physical strain, such as running or swimming.
The game provides each character with a "Mental Health" meter, which goes from full ("Neutral") to empty ("Wrecked") and represents the character's mental health. Many of the game's events (such as the opening, where Lucas comes over to the prone body of his victim) subtract points from the meter, but everyday or habitual activities (such as eating, urinating or receiving good news) will add to them, as well as scenarios in which the character makes a revealing discovery or action that helps him or her in some substantial way.
An empty Sanity meter leads to an end depending on the character (Carla and Tyler will give up their badges, and Lucas will either turn himself in, or commit suicide) and a Game Over.
Finally, a conversation system is also implemented into the game, with the right analog stick being used to choose dialogue options. When conversing with certain NPCs, this is sometimes accompanied by a "Suspicion" meter, which is affected by the player's choices indicating how suspicious the character who Lucas is conversing with is., e.g. failing to give convincing answers when being interrogated by police. In these situations, if the player does not make a choice within the allotted time limit, the game will make a default choice for him, or else the conversation is abruptly ended. It should be noted that it is impossible to leave a conversation without the minimum amount of information necessary for the characters to progress in the game, and if one continually strays too far from the topic's intended resolution, the game will automatically make the choice for him. Examples include the cop in Joe's Diner telling the player, as Carla Valenti, about the waitress and the table at which Lucas was sitting, Lucas being interrogated by Carla or Tyler.

The game is set in January 2009. The story begins on a cold New York night, when Lucas, in a possessed trance, stabs a man to death in the restroom of an East Side diner and then flees the scene in confusion. His crime is set against a backdrop of similar ritualistic murders and falling temperatures (hence the name). Detectives Valenti and Miles are charged with solving the case and tracking him down. Lucas then becomes involved in a two millennia old prophecy which will determine the fate of the world. The player is placed in control of all three, and occasionally of Markus, Lucas' brother, over the course of the game, and thus is given the chance to sometimes aid one character in opposing another.
The game also has an innovative plot for its manifold branchings and options. The creators describe the plot as "elastic," capable of much stretching to accommodate the player's choices and decisions across all three characters, although it still follows a set plot thread.[1] For instance, in the opening scene, the player is placed in control of Lucas and left to deal with the aftermath of the murder. The player's choices, such as what to hide, what to leave alone and how to escape the diner, determines what clues Detective Valenti and Detective Miles find and how the patrons recall him, and thus the ease with which they later discover his identity.
The game features three endings with the outcome dependent solely on the results of the final scenes. However, the game features many more scenes and game-play sections, depending on the choices that the player makes.
In each ending, taking place three months later, Lucas states that he has been living with Carla since the end of the game. He then adds that Carla is pregnant from the time in the underground base with the Invisibles, and that their child was exposed to the Chroma as Lucas had been when he was in his mother’s womb.


Lucas Kane is the main and primary male protagonist in Fahrenheit, and is voiced by David Gasman. Born and raised on the remote Wishita military base by his scientist parents (the deaths of both in a car accident, of which, severely affected him 10 years previously to the events of the game), Lucas now works as an IT manager and head of computer maintenance for the Naser & Jones Bank in Manhattan in New York City. Lucas' simple life was turned upside down when he was suddenly possessed by an unearthly force that drove him to murder a random man in the bathroom of a local diner. For reasons he didn't understand; Lucas, since his early childhood, has had periodic clairvoyant visions (the disturbing nature of which it is implied had a severe emotional impact on him as a child and drove him to isolate himself from others). These visions were long dormant by the events of the game, but suddenly resurfaced in an increased frequency and potency following the events at the diner; and were also accompanied by enhanced speed & strength & reflexes, as well as the emergence of telekinetic abilities and flight. Over the course of the game; Lucas evades hunting police and unknown forces seeking to capture or kill him, all the while he delves deeper into the conspiracy surrounding the crime. In the end, Lucas finds himself the last hope of the human race in the face of total destruction by either a secret totalitarian government or a race of sentient artificial lifeforms.
Carla Valenti is the primary female protagonist in Fahrenheit, and is voiced by Barbara Scaff. Carla is a hardened and serious police lieutenant and detective inspector with the New York Police Department, and is Sgt. Tyler Miles' partner. Carla is known among the other members of the NYPD for her intense work ethic and commitment to the job (to the point it appears excessive), but in reality her devotion to her work is, in part, her own way of compensating for her lack of any personal life and few friends (among which are Tyler, several NYPD colleagues and her neighbour Tommy). Carla is naturally inquisitive and completionist; tending to brood over cases which appear to go nowhere, and is prepared to spend long hours poring over evidence in the hopes of finding one vital clue which may have been missed. For reasons she doesn't know; Carla is also highly claustrophobic, and is prone to panic attacks when inside dark, enclosed spaces. Carla and Tyler are the detectives called upon to investigate the gruesome diner murder, and over the course of the game; they work together to track Lucas Kane; the killer, down, and ultimately begin hunting him. Gradually, Carla delves deeper into the conspiracy surrounding the crime, and finds odd events occuring that eventually drive her to team up with Lucas to fight the Orange and Purple Clans. After only a short amount of time working with Lucas; Carla finds herself drawn to him, and ultimately falls in love with him and has sex with Lucas on the eve of the final battle with the Clans. Regardless of the battle's outcome; in the epilogue Carla marries the exonerated Lucas and is pregnant with their child.
Tyler Miles, voiced by David Gasman, is a police sergeant and detective agent with the New York Police Department, and is Lt. Carla Valenti's partner. Tyler, contrary to Carla's serious bearing, has a much more lackdaisical attitude towards life, but his devotion to the job and fiancée; Samantha "Sam" Malone is unquestionable (though his relationship with Sam has always been close, he has also been under constant strain due to her terror of him being hurt in the course of his job). While generally upbeat; the long working hours and increasing cold began to sink his spirits greatly. Tyler and Carla are the detectives called upon to investigate the gruesome diner murder, and over the course of the game; they work together to track Lucas Kane; the killer, down, and ultimately begin hunting him. This latest murder doesn't help Tyler's sinking morale; ultimately leaving him to reconsider life as a police officer. In his last appearance, Tyler is given the choice of staying in New York to aid the police in maintaining order as the world is increasingly frozen over, or to leave for Florida with Sam and run her parents' store; giving up his police career. His fate is unknown; decided by the player, though nevertheless Carla wishes him luck as she leaves to aid Lucas in finding the Indigo Child. Tyler's hobbies include playing basketball, video games (which he often talks about or makes references to, including multiple instances of metafiction) and collecting 1970s memorabilia and vinyl Motown albums.
Father Markus Kane, voiced by Doug Rand, is the older brother of Lucas. When they were kids, Markus tried to get Lucas, who was something of a loner, more involved with the other children on their military base home. With time, Markus matured and now lives and works in New York as a Roman Catholic Priest at St. Mary's Cathedral; a local church. When Lucas confesses his actions at the diner; Markus, despite being emotionally rocked, worried for his brother, as well as the current state of affairs; his faith and inability to comprehend what is happening to Lucas over the course of the game prevents him from seeing very much past his own fears for Lucas' mental health. His fate is unknown; decided by the player. Either he can be killed by The Oracle during his search for Lucas; despite Lucas' attempts to warn him, or he can be warned in time, summoned to the underground lair of the Invisibles, where he finally learns the truth after the Invisibles explain everything to him; making him realize Lucas wasn't crazy and was telling the truth.

"The Oracle" is the main villain in Fahrenheit and archenemy of Lucas Kane. Outwardly, all that is seen of him is him wearing a gray hooded overcoat that mostly hides his face, and his true nature remained a mystery to everyone else. The Oracle is learned in magical arts; possessing telepathic abilities (to the point he can effortlessly erase his presence from the minds of others even as they speak to him, and leaves no physical traces; as well as able to control who could see and hear him), telekinesis, teleportation, invisibility and flight. It was later revealed "The Oracle" (referred to as such as no one else alive remembers his name) is a sacrificial priest of the long-extinct Mayan Civilization that lived long past his natural death by entering the service of the Orange Clan and working to locate the Indigo Child; by sacrificing 7 people a year for the past 2000 years, in a Mayan sacrificial ritual he does utilizing others to commit the deed; one of the latest sacrifices involving Lucas Kane.


The soundtrack was a well received aspect of the game, receiving praise from various sources.[2][3] Impressed by his previous work on soundtracks for David Lynch films, David Cage decided to enlist Angelo Badalamenti onto the project. Cage did not want the soundtrack to be composed of generic orchestral pieces in the vein of John Williams or Carmina Burana, but instead more emotional and atmospheric, something that he felt Badalamenti achieved.[4] Further licensed pieces of music were used in the game, these could also be unlocked for later listening:

The original title of Fahrenheit was changed to Indigo Prophecy in the United States and Canada. The change was made to avoid confusion with the film Fahrenheit 9/11.[1] Scenes depicting sex (one of which is interactive) and other "adult content" were removed from the North American versions so the game would receive a "Mature" (17+) rating. Both the name change and editing were made at the request of the publisher.
A likely cause for the requested changes was due to the infamous Hot Coffee mod for Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, which garnered unfavorable media attention and controversy in mid-2005. Although Fahrenheit's sex scenes are not explicit (less so than a typical "R"-rated film), Quantic Dream claims that the cuts don't "dramatically affect" the plot of the game. The deleted scenes are completely ancillary to the plot. Even so, the game has been re-released in Canada and the USA under the title Fahrenheit: Indigo Prophecy Director's Cut. This version of the game, available only for Windows as a download, is uncut and rated Adults Only (18+).
The game faced no such problems in other parts of the world; any copy of the game entitled Fahrenheit has not been edited in any way.

In the European version of the game there are a couple of nude scenes that were cut from the US release.
The first is when we first see Carla's apartment. The scene starts with her having a shower. She exits the shower. We see her body from different angles (i.e. a top down position). Her nipples can't be seen. Two sex scenes are featured in the game; one optional, interactive scene between Lucas and Tiffany, and the second between Lucas and Carla in the Invisibles' underground base. In the first scene, Lucas' buttocks are visible and in the latter scene Carla's nipples are partially visible.
In addition, one unlockable bonus movie in the game, titled 'Sam's Dance' shows Sam dancing for Tyler, eventually stripping nude; as the scene fades out at the end, a brief, uncensored frontal nude shot is shown.

GameSpot said "Fahrenheit gives the term 'cinematic gameplay' some context, as well as some real heartfelt meaning. But where the game truly shines is in its story, which is a deep, captivating, and sometimes disturbing tale". It received both the Best Story and Best Adventure Game award for 2005 from the site, as well as being nominated for 4 others.
Indigo Prophecy is ranked tenth on Game Informer’s list of The Top 10 Video Game Openings.[5]

