Billy Meier
"Billy" Eduard Albert Meier (February 3, 1937) is a citizen of Switzerland who claims to be a UFO contactee. He is also the source of many controversial UFO photographs, which he states are evidence of his encounter. Meier reports regular contact with extraterrestrials who impart spiritual and philosophical wisdom. He describes the Plejaren (aliens from the Pleiades) as humanoid.

A farmer born in the town of Bulach in the Swiss Lowlands, Eduard "Billy" Meier's claimed his first extraterrestrial contacts occurred in 1942 at the age of five with an elderly extraterrestrial human man named Sfath.[1] Contacts with Sfath lasted until 1953. From 1953 to 1964 Meier's contacts continued with an extraterrestrial human woman named Asket.[2] Meier says that after an eleven year break, contacts resumed again (beginning on January 28, 1975) with an extraterrestrial human woman named Semjase[3] the granddaughter of Sfath.
In his teens, Meier joined the French Foreign Legion but says he soon left and returned home. He traveled extensively around the world pursuing spiritual exploration, covering some forty-two countries over twelve years. In 1965 he lost his left arm in a bus accident in Turkey. In 1966 he met and married a Greek woman, Kalliope, with whom he has three children. The nickname "Billy" came by way of an American friend who thought Meier's cowboy style of dress reminded her of "Billy The Kid". This anecdote was told by Meier himself in an interview with Bob Zanotti of Swiss Radio International in June, 1982. (BZ, 1/08).
Meier has accumulated a large collection of controversial photographs. These photos show alleged spaceships (called beamships) as well as alleged extraterrestrials (humanoids called the Plejaren). Meier says that the Plejaren gave him permission to photograph [4] and film their beamships in order to produce some of the evidence for extraterrestrial visitation. [5] Meier's claims are disputed by UFO skeptics as well as some UFO enthusiasts. [6] [7] [8]
Many Meier proponents and believers exist among UFO enthusiasts, and his evidence has seen increased exposure through the efforts of an American representative, Michael Horn, [9] who has appeared on popular late-night paranormal programs such as Coast to Coast AM.

Beginning in 1975, Meier allegedly began his official contacts ("official" in that evidence was to be provided publicly, unlike earlier contacts), communicating both directly (face-to-face) and by telepathy with a core group of the Pleiadians/Plejaren, or Errans as he also refers to them (Erra being their home planet), who gave their names as Ptaah, Semjase, Quetzal, and Pleija, among numerous others. According to Meier himself in the video documentary 'Contact', he says that his first contact with extraterrestrials began on January 28, 1975.[10]
These visitors reportedly hail from the Plejares star system which is beyond the Pleiades and in a dimension that is a fraction of a second in the future from our own (an alternate timeline). These Plejaren have allegedly afforded Meier a more interesting sampling of evidence than derive from most such encounters, including highly detailed photography, videos, multi-toned sound recordings, the temporary use of a weapon which he employed for trial on a nearby tree, and metal alloy samples.[11]
Meier claimed the visitors charged him with certain informational and consciousness-raising tasks.[12] As he undertook this mission he met with a great deal of scorn and derision including, his center says, twenty-one assassination attempts. Some of these were allegedly initiated by hostile extraterrestrial entities and then defeated largely through the intervention of his Plejaren friends.[13] Meier was uncomfortable with the megalomaniacal associations others would attach to his role as a representative, since they employed the term "prophet", but he undertook the effort nonetheless.
In 1975 Meier established the Freie Interessengemeinschaft für Grenz- und Geisteswissenschaften und Ufologiestudien ("Free Community of Interests for the Fringe and Spiritual Sciences and UFOlogical Studies") , or FIGU, a non-profit organization for the benefit of researchers into this field, and headquartered it at the Semjase Silver Star Center.[14]

Meier claims that he was instructed to transcribe his conversations with the various extraterrestrials, some of which have been published in the German language. These books are referred to as the Contact Notes (or Contact Reports). Currently there are nine volumes of the Contact Reports (titled Plejadisch-Plejarische Kontaktberichte) published. Some of the Contact Reports were translated into English, extensively edited and expurgated, and published in the out-of-print four-volume set Message From The Pleiades by Meier case investigator Wendelle Stevens.
Meier's alleged discussions with the Plejarens are highly detailed and wide-ranging, affording a body of claims running from religion and the afterlife to human history to science and astronomical phenomena to ecology and environmental dangers and prophecies of future historic trends and events.
An additional aspect of the Meier case is the highly controversial book the Talmud Jmmanuel. It is said to be the translation of ancient Aramaic scrolls that were discovered by Meier and a colleague in Jerusalem in 1963. The book claims to be the original teachings and life events of the man named Jmmanuel. Extensive study has been made of the book by James Deardorff.


Some of the most important evidence for Meier's claims come from his large collection of controversial photographs. These include images of alleged spacecraft in the Swiss countryside, the Apollo-Soyuz 1975 docking and distant astronomical phenomena. Supporters believe that the images are exceptionally high quality and that a one-armed man would not have been able to create such remarkable fakes.
Critics such as Stanton Friedman and Jacques Vallée believe them to be fakes.[15] Some critics have provided examples of approching photos[16] and have attempted to demonstrate that some appear to be photos taken from science fiction books, paintings and television programs.[17] Meier claims that these photos were altered by intelligence agencies and slipped into his collection in order to discredit his UFO case.[18] Other allegations include focus and light-direction problems consistent with cut-and-paste and model work.[19]

The metal alloy samples are said to have been given to Meier by the Plejarens and then passed on to Wendelle Stevens who then had them tested by chemist Marcel Vogel. Vogel said that in his view the samples could not have been made by means of contemporary earthly metallurgy as they were apparently produced via cold fusion. Vogel was however a chemist, not a metallurgist. Vogel also stated that the metal vanished from the IBM laboratory not long after his work was completed which prevented other scientists from performing their own analyses on it.

As recounted in the unabridged version of Message from the Pleiades, Vol. 2, Meier was taken back in time by the extraterrestrial Asket where he met personally with Jmmanuel, alleged to be the real Jesus, who told Meier that Meier's evolution was higher than Jmmanuel' himself, saying, "Truly, your evolution has proceeded for 2000 years further, which fact I have not considered." (page 512). The contact with Jmmanuel lasted for four days before returning to the present time. [20]

"Samjase" (pronounced semyasi in English) is a common Hindu word. Samjase are those people who leave materialism and opt for spiritualism in their whole lives. Hindu teachings of Sannyasa, "renunciation," explain the meaning more accurately. The name sounds similar to (and thus some unspecified people feel must be identical with) el Samyaza the heaven-seizer, as described in the Book of Enoch, purportedly the one who originated and orchestrated the invasion program recorded in Genesis 6 (See: Nephilim).
The Book of Enoch describes how some of these beings, led by Samyaza, decided to interfere with Adamic humanity, giving them arts of magic, writing, and technology. The Nephilim are described in Genesis as "men of renown", an interbreeding of the "Sons of Elohim" with the "daughters of men" (for which, Yahweh floods the Earth to halt Nephilim influence, and, as some Orthodox Jews and recently some Evangelical Christian scholars say, so as to allow the Messiah to be born, suggesting a strategic, historical motive behind this seemingly pointless act of lust). The Watchers appear in other texts regarded as apocrypha, and are sometimes even regarded as a previously-created form of humanity, or "Celestial Sons".
Meier fans counter that the spelling is different and that the names' sounding alike doesn't mean that they are the same, just as Robert and Roberta are distinct names. Second, Semjase is a female, and there is also a different being, Semjaza, who is the same as in Enoch, a completely different male ET who apparently fathered the Teutonic race).
Meier himself speaks of two human males named "Semjasa" who influence the Earth in much the same way as described in the Book of Enoch, a text that he says was altered for religious purposes. The first Semjasa, who lived around 389,000 years ago, interbred with native Earth-humanity, creating a lineage. The second Semjasa, said to be the same spirit-form in another human male, lived about 11,000 years ago and, as a remnant of Atlantis, seeded an Earth-human lineage, an inter-breeding of the Atlanteans with the wild humans of North Africa, Mesopotamia, and Northern India. Meier also claims that this was the origin of the Three Peoples: the original Armenians, the Ancient Hebrews, and the Aryans.[21]
According to Billy Meier, the name 'Semjase' or 'Semjasa' simply means 'Semi-JHWH', referring to the JHWH, the highest rank and title in Lyran-descended societies. In both historical cases, Semjasa was said to be of lesser rank than the JHWH, being a 'Semi-JHWH', so the name could be associated with the title as well.

Billy Meier has repeatedly warned of an impending Third World War beginning in November 2006, 2008, 2010, or 2011. He has also denounced the terroristic activities and vigilante behaviors of various Muslim extremist groups, which he says only foments the possibility for war. At one time, Meier reported November, 2006 as the most likely start of World War III. This has since been revised to November 2008. That date has passed. In any case, Meier states that in an upcoming year, four world leaders will die within seven days of one another as a sign that within merely 2 years of these events the long-feared world war will indeed erupt, unless terrestrials finally gain mastery over their reasoning to stop all these ills. He states that these are all prophecies, however, and subject to change, as opposed to set-in-stone predictions.[22]




 Textbooks from Wikibooks
 Quotations from Wikiquote
 Source texts from Wikisource
 Images and media from Commons
 News stories from Wikinews
