Linear least squares
Linear least squares is an important computational problem, that arises primarily in applications when it is desired to fit a linear mathematical model to measurements obtained from experiments. The goals of linear least squares are to extract predictions from the measurements and to reduce the effect of measurement errors. Mathematically, it can be stated as the problem of finding an approximate solution to an overdetermined system of linear equations. In statistics, it corresponds to the maximum likelihood estimate for a linear model with normally distributed error.
Linear least square problems admit a closed-form solution, in contrast to non-linear least squares problems, which often have to be solved by an iterative procedure.

As a result of an experiment, four (x,y) data points were obtained, (1,6), (2,5), (3,7), and (4,10) (shown in red in the picture on the right). It is desired to find a line y = β1 + β2x that fits "best" these four points. In other words, we would like to find the numbers β1 and β2 that approximately solve the overdetermined linear system
of four equations in two unknowns in some "best" sense.
The least squares approach to solving this problem is to try to make as small as possible the sum of squares of "errors" between the right- and left-hand sides of these equations, that is, to find the minimum of the function
The minimum is determined by calculating the partial derivatives of S(β1,β2) in respect to β1 and β2 and setting them to zero. This results in a system of two equations in two unknowns, called the normal equations, which, when solved, gives the solution
and the equation y = 3.5 + 1.4x of the line of best fit. The residuals, that is, the discrepancies between the y values from the experiment and the y values calculated using the line of best fit are then found to be 1.1, − 1.3, − 0.7, and 0.9 (see the picture on the right). The minimum value of the sum of squares is S(3.5,1.4) = 1.12 + ( − 1.3)2 + ( − 0.7)2 + 0.92 = 4.2.

The common computational procedure to find a first-degree polynomial function approximation in a situation like this is as follows.
Use  for the number of data points.
Find the four sums: , , , and .
The calculations for the slope, m, and the y-intercept, b, are as follows.
and

Consider an overdetermined system
of m linear equations in n unknowns,  with m > n, written in matrix form as
Such a system usually has no solution, and the goal is then to find the numbers βj which fit the equations "best", in the sense of solving the quadratic minimization problem
A justification for choosing this criterion is given in properties below. This minimization problem has a unique solution, provided that the n columns of the matrix X are linearly independent, given by solving the normal equations

The primary application of linear least squares is in data fitting. Given a set of m data points  consisting of experimentally measured values taken at m values  of an independent variable (xi may be scalar or vector quantities), and given a model function  with  it is desired to find the parameters βj such that the model function fits "best" the data. In linear least squares, linearity is meant to be with respect to parameters βj, so
Here, the functions φj may be nonlinear with respect to the variable x.
Ideally, the model function fits the data exactly, so
for all  This is usually not possible in practice, as there are more data points than there are parameters to be determined. The approach chosen then is to find the minimal possible value of the sum of squares of the residuals
so to minimize the function
After substituting for ri and then for f, this minimization problem becomes the quadratic minimization problem above with Xij = φj(xi), and the best fit can be found by solving the normal equations.

S is minimized when its gradient with respect to each parameter is equal to zero. The elements of the gradient vector are the partial derivatives of S with respect to the parameters:
Since , the derivatives are
Substitution of the expressions for the residuals and the derivatives into the gradient equations gives
Upon rearrangement, the normal equations
are obtained. The normal equations are written in matrix notation as
The solution of the normal equations yields the vector  of the optimal parameter values.


Although the algebraic solution of the normal equations can be written as
it is not good practice to invert the normal equations matrix. An exception occurs in numerical smoothing and differentiation where an analytical expression is required.
If the matrix  is well-conditioned and positive definite, that is, it has full rank, the normal equations can be solved directly by using the Cholesky decomposition , where R is an upper triangular matrix, giving
The solution is obtained in two stages, a forward substitution, , followed by a backward substitution . Both subtitutions are facilitated by the triangular nature of R.
See example of linear regression for a worked-out numerical example with three parameters.

Orthogonal decomposition methods of solving the least squares problem are slower than the normal equations method but are more numerically stable.
The extra stability results from not having to form the product . The residuals are written in matrix notation as
The matrix X is subjected to an orthogonal decomposition; the QR decomposition will serve to illustrate the process.
where Q is an orthogonal  matrix and R is an  matrix which is partitioned into a  block, , and a  zero block.  is upper triangular.
The residual vector is left-multiplied by .
The sum of squares of the transformed residuals, , is the same as before,  because Q is orthogonal.
The minimum value of S is attained when the upper block, U, is zero. Therefore the parameters are found by solving
These equations are easily solved as  is upper triangular.
An alternative decomposition of X is the singular value decomposition (SVD)[1]
This is effectively another kind of orthogonal decomposition as both U and V are orthogonal. This method is the most computationally intensive, but is particularly useful if the normal equations matrix, , is very ill-conditioned (i.e. if its condition number multiplied by the machine's relative round-off error is appreciably large). In that case, including the smallest singular values in the inversion merely adds numerical noise to the solution. This can be cured using the truncated SVD approach, giving a more stable and exact answer, by explicitly setting to zero all singular values below a certain threshold and so ignoring them, a process closely related to factor analysis.

The gradient equations at the minimum can be written as
A geometrical interpretation of these equations is that the vector of residuals,  is orthogonal to the column space of , since the dot product  is equal to zero for any conformal vector, . This means that  is the shortest of all possible vectors , that is, the variance of the residuals is the minimum possible. This is illustrated at the right.
If the experimental errors, , are uncorrelated, have a mean of zero and a constant variance, σ, the Gauss-Markov theorem states that the least-squares estimator, , has the minimum variance of all estimators that are linear combinations of the observations. In this sense it is the best, or optimal, estimator of the parameters. Note particularly that this property is independent of the statistical distribution function of the errors. In other words, the distribution function of the errors need not be a normal distribution. However, for some probability distributions, there is no guarantee that the least-squares solution is even possible given the observations; still, in such cases it is the best estimator that is both linear and unbiased.
For example, it is easy to show that the arithmetic mean of a set of measurements of a quantity is the least-squares estimator of the value of that quantity. If the conditions of the Gauss-Markov theorem apply, the arithmetic mean is optimal, whatever the distribution of errors of the measurements might be.
However, in the case that the experimental errors do belong to a Normal distribution, the least-squares estimator is also a maximum likelihood estimator.[2]
These properties underpin the use of the method of least squares for all types of data fitting, even when the assumptions are not strictly valid.

An assumption underlying the treatment given above is that the independent variable, x, is free of error. In practice, the errors on the measurements of the independent variable are usually much smaller than the errors on the dependent variable and can therefore be ignored. When this is not the case, total least squares also known as Errors-in-variables model, or Rigorous least squares, should be used. This can be done by adjusting the weighting scheme to take into account errors on both the dependent and independent variables and then following the standard procedure.[3][4]
In some cases the (weighted) normal equations matrix  is ill-conditioned; this occurs when the measurements have only a marginal effect on one or more of the estimated parameters.[5] In these cases, the least squares estimate amplifies the measurement noise and may be grossly inaccurate. Various regularization techniques can be applied in such cases, the most common of which is called Tikhonov regularization. If further information about the parameters is known, for example, a range of possible values of x, then minimax techniques can also be used to increase the stability of the solution.
Another drawback of the least squares estimator is the fact that the norm of the residuals,  is minimized, whereas in some cases one is truly interested in obtaining small error in the parameter , e.g., a small value of . However, since  is unknown, this quantity cannot be directly minimized. If a prior probability on  is known, then a Bayes estimator can be used to minimize the mean squared error, . The least squares method is often applied when no prior is known. Surprisingly, however, better estimators can be constructed, an effect known as Stein's phenomenon. For example, if the measurement error is Gaussian, several estimators are known which dominate, or outperform, the least squares technique; the best known of these is the James-Stein estimator.

When the observations are not equally reliable, a weighted sum of squares
may be minimized.
Each element of the diagonal weight matrix, W should,ideally, be equal to the reciprocal of the variance of the measurement.[6] The normal equations are then

The parameter values are linear combinations of the observed values
Therefore an expression for the errors on the parameter can be obtained by error propagation from the errors on the observations. Let the variance-covariance matrix for the observations be denoted by M and that of the parameters by Mβ. Then,
When , this simplifies to
When unit weights are used () it is implied that the experimental errors are uncorrelated and all equal: , where  is known as the variance of an observation of unit weight, and  is an identity matrix. In this case  is approximated by , where S is the minimum value of the objective function
In all cases, the variance of the parameter βi is given by  and the covariance between parameters βi and 
