Snowboard
Snowboards are boards, which resemble a wide ski, with the ability to glide on snow.[1] Users of such equipment may be referred to as snowboarders. Commercial snowboards generally require extra equipment such as bindings and special boots which help secure both feet of a snowboarder, whom generally rides in an upright position.[1] Such snowboards are commonly used by people at ski hills or resorts for leisure, enternainment and competitive purposes in the activity called snowboarding. A size and shape variance in the boards accommodates different people, skill levels, snow types, and riding styles. The average length varies between 140-165 cm and the average width is between 24-27 cm.[citation needed] Shorter boards are typically considered youth size, designed for use by children, though some varieties of short boards are specifically designed for a special purpose, such as the performance of snowboarding tricks. Such tricks may take place in a snowpark along side freestyle skiers. The development of commercial snowboards has seen the use of a laminated wood core sandwiched between multiple layers of fiberglass.[citation needed] The bottom or 'base' of the snowboard is generally made of various constructions of plastic, and is surrounded by a thin strip of steel, known as the 'edge'. The top layer, where a printed graphic may reside, can be made of Acrylic.[citation needed] The first snowboard was invented and manufactured in Utah beginning in the early 1970s, and was commemorated in 2007 by the United States mint among the three semi-final designs of the Utah state quarter[2]

Some argue that the first snowboard was invented by Sherman Poppen in 1965 and was called a Snurfer (combination of Snow Surfer). The snurfer was fairly simple and had no bindings. However the state of Utah claims that the first snowboards were developed and manufactured there in the early 1970s, and was commemorated in 2007 by the United States mint among the three semi-final designs of the Utah state quarter[2]. At least one source believes that Jake Burton Carpenter (founder of Burton Snowboards)[3] and/or Tom Sims (founder of Sims Snowboards) invented snowboarding. Bryan Johnston, Global VP of Marketing for Burton, stated[4] in 2008 that a book which describes Jake Burton Carpenter as the inventor of the snowboard is "misleading".
In 2008, selling snowboarding equipment was a $487 million industry.[3] In 2008, average equipment ran about $540 including board, boots, and bindings.

Snowboards come in several different styles, depending on the type of riding intended:
Snowboards are generally constructed of a hardwood core which is sandwiched between multiple layers or fibreglass. Some snowboards incorporate the use of more exotic materials such as Carbon Fibre, Kevlar, Aluminium (as a honeycomb core structure), and have even incorporated Piezo dampers. The front (or "nose,") of the board is upturned to help the board glide over uneven snow. The back (or "tail") of the board is also upturned to enable backwards (or "switch") riding. The base (the side of the board which contacts the ground) is made of Polyethylene plastic. The two major types of base construction are Extruded and Sintered. An extruded base is a basic, low-maintenance design which basically consists of the plastic base material melted into its form. A sintered base uses the same material as an Extruded base, but first grinds the material into a powder, then, using heat and pressure, molds the material into its desired form. A sintered base is generally softer than its extruded counterpart, but has a porous structure which enables it to absorb wax. This wax absorption (along with a properly done 'hot wax'), greatly reduces surface friction between the base and the snow. Snowboards with sintered bases are much faster, but require semi-regular maintenance and are easier to damage. The bottom-edges of the snowboard are fitted with a thin strip of steel, just a couple of millimeters wide. This steel edge allows the board to grab or 'dig in' to hard snow and ice (like the blade of an ice skate), and also protects the boards internal structure. The top of the board is typically a layer of acrylic with some form of graphic designed to attract attention, showcase artwork, or serve the purpose similar to that of any other form of printed media. Flite Snowboards, an early and often underquoted designer, pressed the first closed-molded boards from a garage in Newport, RI in the mid 1980's. Snowboard topsheet graphics can be a highly personal statement and many riders spend many hours customizing the look of their boards. The top of some boards may even include thin inlays with other materials, and some are made entirely of epoxy-impregnated wood. The base of the board may also feature graphics, often designed in a manner to make the board's manufacturer recognizable in photos.
Snowboard designs differ primarily in:
Established Snowboard Brands include: Burton, Atomic, Salomon, Rossignol, K2, Rome, GNU/Lib Tech, Ride, and Stepchild.
Younger or smaller brands include Capita Super, Automaton Snowboards, Trilogy Arts, Millennium Three, Nitro Snowboards, technine, academy, Clyde Snowboards[4], F2[5], and Harlot Snowboards[6].

The various components of a snowboard are:

Snowboard boots are mostly considered soft boots, though alpine snowboarding uses a harder boot similar to a ski boot. A boot's primary function is to transfer the rider's energy into the board, protect the rider with support, and keep the rider's feet warm. A snowboarder shopping for boots is usually looking for a good fit, flex, and looks. Boots can have different features such as lacing styles, heat molding liners, and gel padding that the snowboarder also might be looking for. Tradeoffs include rigidity versus comfort, and built in forward lean, versus comfort.
There are three incompatible types:

Bindings are separate components from the snowboard deck and are very important parts of the total snowboard interface. The bindings main function are to hold the riders boot in place tightly so the rider can transfer their energy to the board. Most bindings are attached to the board with four screws that are placed in the center of the binding. Although a rather new technology from Burton called Infinite channel system[7] uses two screws, both on the outsides of the binding.
There are several types of bindings. Strap-in, step-in, and hybrid bindings are used by most recreational riders and all freestyle riders.

These are the most popular yet technically deficient concept in snowboarding. Strap-in bindings were conceived before snowboard specific boots existed. With the lack of proper footwear, snowboarders used any means necessary to attach their feet to their snowboards and gain the leverage needed for turning. Typical boots used in these early days of snowboarding were "sorels" or "snowmobile" boots. These boots were not designed for snowboarding and did not provide the support desired for doing turns on the heel edge of a snowboard. As a result, early innovators such as Louis Fournier conceived the "high-back" binding design which was later commercialized and patented by Jeff Grell. The Highback binding is the technology produced by most binding equipment manufacturers in the snowboard industry. The leverage provided by Highbacks, greatly improved board control but produced large amounts of strain on the riders feet. Snowboarder's such as Craig Kelly adapted by using plastic "tongues" to protect their feet from strap-pressure. In response, companies such as Burton and Gnu began to offer "tongues" to relieve the pressure caused by strap-bindings on the top of the riders feet.
As the snowboard market grew bigger companies began to produce boots specifically for snowboarding which helped to absorb the forces and pressure caused from Highback bindings with Straps. With modern strap-bindings, the rider wears a boot which has a thick but flexible sole, and padded uppers. The foot is held onto the board with two buckle straps - one strapped across the top of the toe area, and one across the ankle area. They can be tightly ratcheted closed for a tight fit and good rider control of the board. The downside for this is that the straps direct forces through isolated points on the top of the riders feet which can cause pain and permanent damage to the foots bone structure. Straps are typically padded to relieve the pain cause from these pressure points.
The other downside is that strap-in bindings take longer to put on, usually requiring the rider to sit in the snow and bend over to adjust the straps. Also, because there are two points of pressure, the strap locations must be adjusted for each individual rider, making it more cumbersome for rental operations. Cap Strap bindings are a recent modification that provide a very tight fit to the toe cup which makes excellent edge control. The drawback to Cap Straps is that they compress the riders feet from toe-to-heel, requiring stiff-soled boots to keep the Cap Straps from mechanically "scrunching" the riders toes when cap straps are over-tightened. Stiff soled boots can reduce the pain and resulting loss of performance caused by over-tightened cap straps . Such companies as Salomon, Rossignol, K2 Sports, Rome, Tech Nine, Ride, Flux, Burton, Union, Drake, and Forum have created different models of cap straps.

In response to the lack of innovation in snowboard binding and boot technology, snowboarders began to experiment and develop step-in binding and boot technology. Independent innovators within the sport recognized the justifiable need for better snowboard boot and bindings to reduce damage and pain caused to snowboarders feet from Strap-in bindings.
Innovators of Step-In systems produced prototypes and designed proprietary Step-In boot and binding systems with the goal of improving the performance of snowboard boots and bindings.
As a result, the mid-90's saw an explosion of Step-in binding and boot development. New companies, Switch and Device, were built on new Step-In binding technology. Existing companies Shimano, K2 and Emery were also quick to market with new step-in technology. Meanwhile early market leaders Burton and Sims were noticeably absent from the step-in market. Sims was the first established industry leader to market with a step-in binding. Sims licensed a step-in system called DNR which was produced by the established ski-binding company Marker. Marker never improved the product which was eventually discontinued. Sims never re-entered the Step-In market.
The risk of commercial failure from a poorly performing Step-in binding presented serious risk to established market leaders. This was evidenced by Airwalk who enjoyed 30% market share in snowboard boot sales when they began development of their step-in binding system. The Airwalk step-in System experienced serious product failure at the first dealer demonstrations, seriously damaging the company's credibility and heralded a decline in the company's former position as the market leader in Snowboard boots. Established snowboarding brands seeking to gain market share while reducing risk, purchased proven Step-In innovators. For example snowboard boot company Vans purchased the Switch Step-In company, while Device Step-In company was purchased by Ride Snowboards.
Other Strap-In binding and boot companies such as Tech-Nine, Northwave eschewed Step-In technology altogether, choosing instead to focus on improving Strap-In technology to the best of their ability. Rather than expose themselves to the risk and expense associated with bringing a superior Step-In system to market, established market leaders such as Burton also chose to focus primarily on improvements to existing Strap-In technology. However, Burton eventually released 2 models of Step-In systems, the SI and the PSI, Burton's SI system enjoyed moderate success, yet never matched the performance of the company's Strap-In products and was never improved upon. Burton never marketed any improvements to either of their Step-In binding systems and eventually discontinued the products.
However, popular opinion, led largely by consumer advertising, focused simply on the inconvenience of strap-in bindings, suggesting that step-ins were created to make entry easier for beginners, allow for fast ski-lift to slope transition, and appeal to the rental market. Step-In systems still present an opportunity to improve the sport by allowing the riders feet to maintain structural integrity and offer increase performance along with improved comfort and convenience. Convenience is arguably the least important concern to most snowboarders although many of the aging snowboard population may find this trait appealing.
Popular misconceptions persist that relative to strap-in bindings, step-in bindings use a stiffer shoe sole and boot to maintain responsiveness in compensation for the lack of over the foot restraining straps and (sometimes) lack of binding highback. However, modern snowboard boots feature stiff soles and rigid tongues to alleviate foot pain caused by over the foot restraining straps, whereas Step-In systems allow for softer flexing boots which allow the riders feet room to function properly.
Most Popular (and incompatible) step-in systems used unique and proprietary mechanisms, such as the Step-Ins produced by Burton, Rossignol and Switch. Shimano and K2 used a technology similar to clipless bicycle pedals. Burton and K2 Clicker step-in binding systems are no longer in production as both companies have opted to focus on the strap-in binding system. Rossignol remains as the sole provider of Step-In binding systems and offers them primarily to the rental market as most consumers and retailers alike have been discouraged by the lack of adequate development and industry support for Step-In technology.

There are also proprietary binding systems that seek to combine the convenience of step-in systems with the control levels attainable with strap-ins. An example is the Flow binding system which is similar to a strap-in binding, except that the foot enters the binding through the back (which then clips into place) rather than the top. The rider's boot is held down by an adjustable webbing that covers most of the foot. Newer Flow models have connected straps in place of the webbing found on older models; these straps are also micro adjustable. In 2004, K2 released the Cinch series, a similar rear entry binding; riders slip their foot in as they would a Flow binding, however rather than webbing, the foot is held down by straps.

A stiff moulded support behind the heel and up the calf area. The HyBak was originally designed by inventor Jeff Grell and built by Flite Snowboards. This allows the rider to apply pressure and effect a "heelside" turn.

Plate bindings are used with hardboots on Alpine or racing snowboards. Extreme carvers and some Boarder Cross racers also use plate bindings. The stiff bindings and boots give much more control over the board and allow the board to be carved much more easily than with softer bindings. Alpine snowboards tend to be longer and thinner with a much stiffer flex for greater edge hold and better carving performance.
Snowboard bindings, unlike ski bindings, do not automatically release upon impact or after falling over. With skis, this mechanism is designed to protect from injuries (particularly to the knee) caused by skis torn in different directions. Automatic release is not required in snowboarding, as the rider's legs are fixed in a static position and twisting of the knee joint cannot occur to the same extent. Furthermore it reduces the dangerous prospect of a board hurtling downhill riderless, and the rider slipping downhill on his back with no means to maintain grip on a steep slope. Nevertheless, some ski areas require the use of a "leash" that connects the snowboard to the rider's leg or boot, in case the snowboard manages to get away from its rider. This is most likely to happen when the rider removes the board at the top or the bottom of a run (or while on a chairlift, which could be dangerous).

Placed between the bindings, but closer to the rear binding the Stomp pads only purpose is to allow the rider to better control the board with only one boot strapped in, such as when manoeuvering onto a chair lift or riding a ski tow. Whereas the upper surface of the board is smooth, the stomp pad has
