Hashima Island
Hashima Island (端島; meaning "Border Island"), commonly called Gunkanjima (軍艦島; meaning "Battleship Island") is one among 505 uninhabited islands in the Nagasaki Prefecture about 15 kilometers from Nagasaki itself. The island was populated from 1887 to 1974 as a coal mining facility. The island's most notable features are the abandoned concrete buildings and the sea wall surrounding it. It has been administered as part of Nagasaki, Nagasaki since 2005, it had previously been administered by the former town of Takashima.
"Battleship Island" is an English translation of the Japanese nickname for Hashima Island, Gunkanjima. The island's nickname came from its apparent resemblance to a battleship, or gunkan (jima is a mutation of shima) due to its high sea-walls. It also is known as the Ghost Island. It is known for its coal mines and their operation during the industrialization of Japan. Mitsubishi bought the island in 1890 and began the project, the aim of which was retrieving coal from the bottom of the sea. They built Japan's first large concrete building, a block of apartments in 1916 to accommodate their burgeoning ranks of workers, and to protect against typhoon destruction.
In 1959, its population density was 835 people per hectare (83,500 people/km^2) for the whole island, or 1,391 per hectare (139,100 people/km^2) for the residential district, the highest population density ever recorded worldwide. As petroleum replaced coal in Japan in the 1960s, coal mines began shutting down all over the country, and Hashima's mines were no exception. Mitsubishi officially announced the closing of the mine in 1974, and today it is empty and bare, which is why it's called the Ghost Island. Travel to Hashima is currently prohibited.
Singer-songwriter Okazaki Ritsuko was born on Hashima Island, and sound artist Mika Björklund's latest project is dedicated to it.

The island has been featured in numerous films, such as the 2003 film Battle Royale II: Requiem, the 1949 film Midori Naki Shima (The Greenless Island) was shot on Hashima Island. The island is also the setting of the final stage in the 2005 video game killer7, where it is strictly referred to as Battleship Island. It was also referenced in the manga Midori Days and the anime Get Backers.
In the manga "Air Gear" a race takes place on this island.

The island is increasingly gaining international attention not only as one of the modern international heritages in the region, but also as the housing complex remnants in the years from Taisho Era to Showa Era. Moreover, the island has become the frequent subject of a discussion among enthusiasts for ruins.
Since the abandoned island has not been maintained, several buildings have already collapsed. Other existing buildings are subject to breakage. In this regard, however, certain collapsed exterior walls have been restored with concrete. While the island was owned by Mitsubishi Material up until 2002, it was voluntarily transferred to Takashima town. Currently, Nagasaki City possesses the island. Although Nagasaki City is considering using the island for tourism, the utilization and preservation of the island requires enormous amount of money, due to the aging of the buildings.

A non-profit organization “The Way to World Heritage Gunkanjima” (represented by Doutoku Sakamoto) is proposing the designation of the Gunkanjima island as UNESCO World Heritage in conjunction with other “the Modern Industrial Heritage Sites in Kyushu and Yamaguchi.” (This was broadcasted by TV Asahi on May 23, 2008)
The representatives of 6 prefectures and 11 cities, including Yuichiro Ito, Governor of Kagoshima Prefecture, and Genjiro Kaneko, Governor of Nagasaki Prefecture, jointly submitted to Agency for Cultural Affair a proposal for addition of “the Modern Industrial Heritage Sites in Kyushu and Yamaguchi” to the Japan’s tentative candidate list for World Heritage nomination.
In August, 2006, Ministry of Economics, Trade and Industry decided to support the World Heritage designation proposal in an attempt to promote the utilization of the Meiji-Era industrial heritage, including Hashima (Gunkanjima), as tourism resources in the Kyushu and Yamaguchi region.
On September 26, 2008, Agency for Cultural Affairs added “the Modern Industrial Heritage Sites in Kyushu and Yamaguchi” to the Tentative Lists.
It was concluded that the property possesses outstanding universal value; the property clearly attests the intensive introduction of Western technology which served as the driving force for Japan’s rapid industrial modernization achieved in a dramatically brief period and its own industrial moderation processes.
In order for the property to be designated as a World Heritage, the following processes need to be taken. The letter of nomination that attests the value of the property is prepared. After the property is nominated by the Japanese government to UNESCO, field investigation is made. Then the proposal is elevated to the discussion by the UNESCO World Heritage Committee.

Currently, landing on the island is not permitted for general public. On August 23, 2005, landing was permitted to journalists only. The scene of the ruined locations on the island was broadcasted in the media. Originally, Nagasaki City planned restoration of a pier, which was actually used in the past, for the prospective tourist landing in April 2008. In addition, a 220-meter-long visitor walkway was planned (Entrance to unsafe building areas is to be prohibited).
Due to the delay in development construction, however, in the end of 2007, the city announced that public access was delayed for approximately one year up until spring 2009. However, the city faced safety concerns, regarding the risk of collapse of the building on the island due to significant aging.
Because of the harsh weather, it was estimated that landing would be feasible for only less than 160 days. From a cost-effectiveness point of view, the city is considering relinquishment of plan for extending visitor walkway further for approximately 300 meters toward the east part of the island and approximately 190 meters toward the west part of the island after year 2009.

Back in old days when people resided on the island, Nomo Shosen line offered service to the island from Nagasaki Port via Ioujima Island and Takashima Island. In 1970, 12 round trip services were available per day. It took 50 minutes from the island to Nagasaki.After all residents left the island, the direct route was discontinued.
Currently, sightseeing boat trips around the island are provided by two operators; Yamasa-Kaiun from Nagasaki Port, Kyodo Co. from Nomo Island. While water taxi is used by unlawful landers, the landing is still prohibited at this time. Upon completion of the development in preparation for the public opening, a direct route is expected to be operated.

Brian Burke-Gaffney, "Hashima: The Ghost Island". In Crossroads: A Journal of Nagasaki History and Culture, No.4, Summer 1996, pp.33-52. ISSN:0919-6102 [1]

Coordinates: 32°37′40″N 129°44′19″E﻿ / ﻿32.6277°N 129.7385°E﻿ / 32.6277; 129.7385
