Edward Hopper
Edward Hopper (July 22, 1882 – May 15, 1967) was a prominent American realist painter and printmaker. While most popularly known for his oil paintings, he was equally proficient as a watercolorist and printmaker in etching. In both his urban and rural scenes, his spare and finely calculated renderings reflected his personal vision of modern American life.[1]


Hopper was born in upper Nyack, New York, a yacht-building center north of New York City, the only son of comfortably well-off middle class family. His parents, mostly of Dutch ancestry, were Garret Henry Hopper, a dry-goods merchant, and his wife Elizabeth Griffiths Smith.[2] Though not as successful as his forebears, Garrett provided well for his two children with considerable help from his wife’s inheritance, and he retired at age forty-nine.[3] Edward and his only sibling Marion attended both private and public schools, and were raised in a strict Baptist home.[4] Owing in part to his father’s mild nature, the household was dominated by women—his mother, grandmother, sister, and maid.[5]
Hopper was a good student in grade school and showed talent in drawing at age five. He readily absorbed his father’s intellectual tendencies and love of French and Russian culture and demonstrated his mother’s artistic lineage.[6] Hopper’s parents encouraged his art and kept him readily supplied with materials, instructional magazines, and illustrated books. By his teens, he was working in pen-and-ink, charcoal, watercolor, and oil—drawing from nature as well as making political cartoons.[7] In 1895, he created his first signed oil painting, Rowboat in Rocky Cove, which demonstrated his early interest in nautical subjects.[8]
In his early self-portraits, Hopper tended to represent himself as skinny, ungraceful, and homely. Though a tall and quiet teenager, his prankish sense of humor found outlet in his art, sometimes in depictions of immigrants or of women dominating men in comic situations. Later in life, he would be drawn mostly to depicting women in his paintings.[9] In high school, he dreamed of being a naval architect, but after graduation he declared his intention of following an art career. Hopper’s parents insisted that he study commercial art so he could have a more reliable means of income.[10] In developing his self-image and individualistic philosophy of life, Hopper was influenced by the writings of Ralph Waldo Emerson, as he stated later, “I admire him greatly…I read him over and over again.”[11]
Hopper began his art studies with a correspondence school in 1899. Soon, however, he transferred to the far more prestigious New York Institute of Art and Design. There he studied for six years, with teachers including William Merritt Chase who instructed him in oil painting.[12] Early on, Hopper modeled his style after Chase and French masters Edouard Manet and Edgar Degas.[13] Sketching from live models proved a challenge and a shock for the conservatively raised Hopper.
Another of his teachers, artist Robert Henri, taught life class. Henri encouraged his students to use their art to "make a stir in the world". He also advised his students, “It isn’t the subject that counts but what you feel about it” and “Forget about art and paint pictures of what interests you in life.”[14] In this manner, Henri influenced Hopper, as well as famous students George Bellows and Rockwell Kent, and motivated them to render realistic depictions of urban life. Some artists in Henri's circle, including another teacher of Hopper’s, John Sloan, became members of “The Eight”, also known as the Ashcan School of American Art.[15] His first existing oil painting to hint at his famous interiors was Solitary Figure in a Theater (c.1904).[16] During his student years, Hopper also painted dozens of nudes, still lifes, landscapes, and portraits, including his self-portraits.[17]
In 1905, Hopper landed a part-time job with an advertising agency, where he did cover designs for trade magazines.[18] Much like famed illustrator N. C. Wyeth, Hopper came to detest illustration, but was bound to it by economic necessity until the mid-1920’s.[19] He temporarily escaped by making three trips to Europe, each centered in Paris, ostensibly to study the emerging art scene there. In fact, however, he studied alone and seemed mostly unaffected by the new currents in art, later stating that he “didn’t remember having heard of Picasso at all.”[20] He was highly impressed by Rembrandt, particularly his Night Watch which he said was “the most wonderful thing of his I have seen, it’s past belief in its reality.”[21]
He initially started out doing urban and architectural scenes in a dark palette. Then he shifted to the lighter palette of the Impressionists before returning to the darker palette that he felt most comfortable with. Hopper later stated, “I got over that and later things done in Paris were more the kind of things I do now.”[22] Hopper spent much of his time drawing street and café scenes, and going to the theater and opera. Unlike many of his contemporaries who imitated the abstract cubist experiments, Hopper was attracted to realist art. Later, however, he admitted to no European influences except for the work of French engraver Charles Meryon, whose moody Paris scenes Hopper imitated.[23]

After returning from his last European trip, Hopper rented a studio in New York City. His exposure to many styles of art seemed to do little to help him find his own distinctive style. Reluctantly, he returned to illustration. Being a free-lancer, Hopper was forced to solicit for projects, and had to knock on the doors of magazine and agency offices to find business.[24] His painting languished, “it’s hard for me to decide what I want to paint. I go for months without finding it sometimes. It comes slowly.”[25] His fellow illustrator Walter Tittle described Hopper’s depressed emotional state in sharper terms, seeing his friend “suffering…from long periods of unconquerable inertia, sitting for days at a time before his easel in helpless unhappiness, unable to raise a hand to break the spell.”[26] In 1912, Hopper traveled to Gloucester, Massachusetts, to seek some inspiration and did his first outdoor paintings in America.[27] He painted Squam Light, the first of many lighthouse paintings to come.[28]
In 1913, at the famous Armory Show, Hopper sold his first painting, Sailing (1911), which he painted over an earlier self-portrait.[29] Hopper was thirty-one, and though he hoped his first sale would lead to others in short order, his career would not catch fire for many more years to come.[30] Shortly after his father’s death that same year, Hopper moved to the Greenwich Village section of New York City, where he lived for the rest of his life. The following year he received a commission to make some movie posters and handle publicity for a movie company.[31] Though he did not like the illustrative work, Hopper was a life-long devotee of the cinema and the theater, both of which became direct subjects for his paintings and which made a direct impact on his compositional methods.[32]
At an impasse over his oil paintings, in 1915 Hopper turned to etching, producing about 70 works, many of urban scenes of both Paris and New York.[33] He also produced some posters for the war effort, as well as continuing with occasional commercial projects.[34] When he could, Hopper did some outdoor watercolors on visits to New England, especially at the art colonies at Ogunquit, Maine, and Monhegan Island. His etchings around 1920 began to get public recognition and expressed some of his later themes, as in Night on the El Train (couples in silence), Evening Wind (solitary female), and The Catboat (simple nautical scene).[35] Two notable oil paintings of this time were New York Interior (1921) and New York Restaurant (1922).[36] He also painted two of his many “window” paintings to come, Girl at the Sewing Machine and Moonlight Interior, that show a figure (clothed or nude) near or gazing out a window of an apartment or viewed from the outside looking in.[37]

By 1923, Hopper’s slow climb finally produced a breakthrough. He re-encountered his future wife Josephine Nivison, an artist and former student of Henri, during a summer painting trip in Gloucester. They were opposites: she was short, open, gregarious, sociable, and liberal, while he was tall, secretive, shy, quiet, introspective, and conservative.[38] They married a year later. She remarked famously, “Sometimes talking to Eddie is just like dropping a stone in a well, except that it doesn’t thump when it hits bottom.”[39] She subordinated her career to his and shared his reclusive life style, which for the rest of their lives revolved around their spare walk-up apartment in the city and their summers in South Truro on Cape Cod. She managed his career and his interviews, was his primary model, and remained his life companion.[40]
With Jo’s help, six of Hopper’s Gloucester watercolor paintings were admitted to an exhibit at the Brooklyn Museum in 1923. One of them, The Mansard Roof, was purchased by the museum for its permanent collection for the sum of $100.[41] The critics generally raved about his work; one stated, “What vitality, force and directness! Observe what can be done with the homeliest subject.”[42] Hopper sold all his watercolors at a one-man show the following year and finally decided to put illustration behind him.
The artist had demonstrated his ability to transfer his attraction to Parisian architecture to American urban and rural architecture. According to Boston Museum of Fine Arts curator Carol Troyen, "Hopper really liked the way these houses, with their turrets and towers and porches and mansard roofs and ornament casting wonderful shadows. He always said that his favorite thing was painting sunlight on the side of a house." [43]
At forty-one, Hopper finally received the recognition he deserved, but he continued to harbor bitterness about his career, later turning down appearances and awards.[44] His financial stability now secured, Hopper would live a simple, stable life and continue creating art in his distinctive style for four more decades.
His Two on the Aisle (1927) sold for a personal record $1,500, enabling Hopper to purchase an automobile, which he used to make field trips to remote areas of New England.[45] In 1929, he produced Chop Suey and Railroad Sunset. The following year, art patron Stephen Clark donated House by the Railroad (1925) to the Museum of Modern Art, the first oil painting it acquired for its collection.[46] Hopper painted his last self-portrait in oil around 1930. Though she posed for many of his paintings, Jo Hopper modeled for only one oil portrait, Jo Painting (1936).[47]
Hopper fared better than many other artists during the Great Depression. His stature took a sharp rise in 1931 when major museums, including the Whitney Museum of American Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art, paid thousands of dollars for his works. He sold thirty paintings that year, including thirteen watercolors.[48] The following year he participated in the first Whitney biennial, and he continued to exhibit in every annual and biennial at the museum for the rest of his life.[49] In 1933, the Museum of Modern Art gave Hopper his first large-scale retrospective.[50] The Hoppers built their summer house in South Truro in 1934.
Hopper was very productive through the 1930’s and early 1940’s, producing among many important works including New York Movie (1939), Girlie Show (1941), Nighthawks (1942), Hotel Lobby (1943), and Morning in a City (1944). During the late 1940’s, however, he suffered a period of relative inactivity. He admitted, “I wish I could paint more. I get sick of reading and going to the movies.”[51] In the two decades to come his health faltered and he had several prostate surgeries and other medical problems.[52] However, in the 1950’s and early 1960’s, he created several more major works, including First Row Orchestra (1951), as well as Morning Sun and Hotel by a Railroad, both in 1952, and Intermission (1963).[53]
Edward Hopper died in his studio near Washington Square in New York City in 1967. His wife, who died 10 months later, bequeathed their joint collection of over three thousand works to the Whitney Museum of American Art.[54] Other significant paintings by Hopper are at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, The Des Moines Art Center, and the Art Institute of Chicago.


With his paintings, Hopper paid particular attention to geometrical design and the careful placement of human figures in proper balance with their environment. He was a slow and methodical artist, as he wrote, “It takes a long time for an idea to strike. Then I have to think about it for a long time. I don’t start painting until I have it all worked out in my mind. I’m all right when I get to the easel. [55] He often made preparatory sketches to work out his carefully calculated compositions. He and his wife kept a detailed ledger of their works noting such items as “sad face of woman unlit”, “electric light from ceiling”, and “thighs cooler”.[56] For "New York Movie" (1939), Hopper demonstrates his thorough preparation with over fifty three sketches of the theater interior and the figure of the pensive usherette.[57]
The effective use of light and shadow to create mood is also central to Hopper’s methods. Bright sunlight (as an emblem of insight or revelation), and the shadows it casts, also play symbolically powerful roles in Hopper paintings such as "Early Sunday Morning" (1930), "Summertime" (1943), "Seven A.M." (1948), and "Sun in an Empty Room" (1963). His use of light and shadow effects have been compared to the cinematography of film noir.[58]
Hopper derived his subject matter from two primary sources: one, the common features of American life (gas stations, motels, restaurants, theaters, railroads, and street scenes) and its inhabitants; and two, seascapes and rural landscapes. Regarding his style, Hopper defined himself as “an amalgam of many races” and not a member of any school, particularly the “Ash Can” school.[59] Once he achieved his mature style, his art remained consistent and self-contained, in spite of all the art trends that came and went during his long career.[60]
Hopper’s seascapes fall into three main groups: pure landscapes of rocks, sea, and beach grass; lighthouses and farmhouses; and sailboats. Sometimes he combined these elements. Most of these paintings depict strong light and fair weather. He showed little interest in snow or rain scenes, or in seasonal color changes. He painted the majority of the pure seascapes in the period between 1916 and1919 on Monhegan Island.[61] Hopper’s The Long Leg (1935) is a nearly all-blue sailing picture with the simplest of elements while his Ground Swell (1939), is more complex and depicts a group of youngsters out for a sail, a theme reminiscent of Winslow Homer’s iconic Breezing Up (1876).[62]
Urban architecture and cityscapes were also major subjects for Hopper. He was fascinated with the American urban scene, “our native architecture with its hideous beauty, its fantastic roofs, pseudo-gothic, French Mansard, Colonial, mongrel or what not, with eye-searing color or delicate harmonies of faded paint, shouldering one another along interminable streets that taper off into swamps or dump heaps.” [63]
In 1925, he produced House by the Railroad. This classic urban work depicts an isolated Victorian mansion and marked Hopper’s artistic maturity. Critic Lloyd Goodrich praised the work as “one of the most poignant and desolating pieces of realism.”[64] The work is the first of a series of stark urban and rural scenes that uses sharp lines and large shapes, played upon by unusual lighting to capture the lonely mood of his subjects. Though a realist painter, Hopper’s “soft” realism simplified shapes and details, and he used saturated color to heighten contrast and create mood. Though critics and viewers interpret meaning and mood in these cityscapes, Hopper insisted “I was more interested in the sunlight on the buildings and on the figures than any symbolism.”[65] As if to prove the point, his late painting Sun in an Empty Room (1963) is a pure study of sunlight.[66]
Most of Hopper's figure paintings focus on the subtle interaction of human beings with their environment—carried out with solo figures, couples, or groups. His primary emotional themes are solitude, loneliness, regret, boredom, and resignation and he demonstrates these emotions in various environments, including the office, in public places, in apartments, on the road , or on vacation.[67] Like stills for a movie or tableaux in a play, Hopper positioned his characters as if they have been captured just before or just after the climax of a scene.[68]
Hopper’s solitary figures are mostly women—dressed, semi-clad, and nude—often reading or looking out a window, or in the workplace. In the early 1920’s, Hopper painted his first such pictures Girl at Sewing Machine (1921), New York Interior (another woman sewing) (1921), and Moonlight Interior (a nude getting into bed) (1923). However, Automat (1927) and Hotel Room” (1931) are more representative of his mature style, emphasizing the solitude more overtly.[69]
As Hopper scholar Gail Levin wrote of “Hotel Room”:
“The spare vertical and diagonal bands of color and sharp electric shadows create a concise and intense drama in the night…Combining poignant subject matter with such a powerful formal arrangement, Hopper’s composition is pure enough to approach an almost abstract sensibility, yet layered with a poetic meaning for the observer.”[70]
Hopper’s Room in New York (1932) and Cape Cod Evening (1939) are prime examples of his “couple” paintings. In the first, a young couple appear alienated and uncommunicative—he reading the newspaper while she idles by the piano. The viewer takes on the role of a voyeur, as if looking with a telescope through the window of the apartment to spy on the couple’s lack of intimacy. In the latter painting, an older couple with little to say to each other, are playing with their dog, whose own attention is drawn away from his masters.[71] Hopper takes the couple theme to a more ambitious level with Excursion into Philosophy (1959). A middle-aged man sits dejectedly on the edge of a bed. Beside him lays an open book and a partial clad female. A shaft of light illuminates the floor in front of him. Jo Hopper noted in their log book, “the open book is Plato, reread too late”. Levin interprets the painting:
Plato’s philosopher, in search of the real and the true, must turn away from this transitory realm and contemplate the eternal Forms and Ideas. The pensive man in Hopper’s painting is positioned between the lure of the earthly domain, figured by the woman, and the call of the higher spiritual domain, represented by the ethereal lightfall. The pain of thinking about this choice and its consequences, after reading Plato all night, is evident. He is paralysed by the fervent inner labour of the melancholic.” [72]
In Office at Night (1940), another “couple” painting, Hopper creates a psychological puzzle. The painting shows a boss focusing on his papers while nearby his curvaceous secretary pulls a file. Several studies for the painting show how Hopper experimented with the positioning of the two figures, perhaps to heighten the eroticism and the tension. Hopper presents the viewer with the possibilities that the boss is either truly uninterested in her obvious appeal or that he is working hard to ignore her. Another interesting aspect of the painting is how Hopper employs three light sources.[73] Hopper went on to make several “office” pictures, but none with a sensual undercurrent.
The most well-known of Hopper's paintings, Nighthawks (1942) is one of his group paintings and shows customers sitting at the counter of an all-night diner. Again, the shapes and diagonals are carefully constructed. The viewpoint is cinematic—from the sidewalk, as if the viewer in approaching the restaurant. The diner's harsh electric light sets it apart from the dark night outside, enhancing the mood and subtle emotion.[74] As in many Hopper paintings, the interaction is minimal, though the counterman seems to be having a few words with the man facing him. The restaurant depicted was inspired by one in Greenwich Village. Both Hopper and his wife posed for the figures, and Jo Hopper gave the painting its title. The inspiration for the picture may have come from Ernest Hemingway’s short story The Killers, which Hopper greatly admired, or from the more philosophical A Clean, Well-Lighted Place.[75] In keeping with the title of his painting, Hopper later stated that “Nighthawks” has more to do with possibility of predators in the night than with loneliness.[76]
His second most recognizable painting after Nighthawks is another urban painting, Early Sunday Morning (originally called “Seventh Avenue Shops”), which shows an empty street scene in sharp side light, with a fire hydrant and a barber pole as stand-ins for human figures. Originally he intended to put figures in the upstairs 
