Magic Roundabout (Swindon)
The Magic Roundabout in Swindon, England was constructed in 1972 and consists of five mini-roundabouts arranged in a circle. It is located near the County Ground, home of Swindon Town F.C. Its name comes from the popular children's television series The Magic Roundabout.

The roundabout was constructed according to the design of Frank Blackmore[1] of the British Transport and Road Research Laboratory, now Transport Research Laboratory. Traffic flow around the smaller, inner roundabout is anticlockwise, and traffic flows in the usual clockwise manner around the five mini-roundabouts and the outer loop.
Local and regular users are proficient at traversing the complex, which offers multiple paths between feeder roads. Virtually the same overall configuration has been in place for over 30 years.
When the roundabout complex was first opened, the mini-roundabouts were not permanently marked out and could be reconfigured while the layout was fine tuned. A police officer was stationed at each mini roundabout during this pilot phase to oversee how drivers coped with the unique arrangement.
The roundabout is built over a section of the old Wilts and Berks Canal. A narrow, stone bridge built c. 1810, which is a grade II listed building,[2] carried the old Saxon way known as Drove Road over the canal half a mile east of the town centre. Its site became covered by Drove Roundabout, which was later redeveloped as the Magic Roundabout. A wharf occupied one edge and the area was known as The Marsh. The Wilts and Berks Canal Trust are currently in negotiations with Swindon Council to include in the New Swindon Regeneration Framework plans to restore the canal through the town centre. The restoration would utilise the route of the North Wilts Canal and not the main West Vale route that the Magic Roundabout sits over. The North Wilts Canal was a separate branch which exited the town northwards through Moredon.
A calendar is produced each year by the UK Roundabout Appreciation Society depicting the town's finest examples.
The official name of the roundabout used to be County Islands, but it was changed in the late 1980s to match its popular name. It is the subject of "English Roundabout", a pop song by the Swindon band XTC.
In 2005, it was voted the worst roundabout in a survey by a UK insurance company.[3] In September 2007, the Magic Roundabout was named as one of the World's Worst Junctions by a UK motoring magazine.[4] In December 2007, BBC News reported a survey identifying The Magic Roundabout as one of the "10 Scariest Junctions in the United Kingdom".[5]
In December, a Christmas tree is added to the centre of the roundabout.[6]



Coordinates: 51°33′46.2″N 01°46′17.3″W﻿ / ﻿51.562833°N 1.771472°W﻿ / 51.562833; -1.771472
