.NET Compact Framework
The Microsoft .NET Compact Framework (.NET CF) is a version of the .NET Framework that is designed to run on Windows CE based mobile/embedded devices such as PDAs, mobile phones, factory controllers, set-top boxes, etc. The .NET Compact Framework uses some of the same class libraries as the full .NET Framework and also a few libraries designed specifically for mobile devices such as Windows CE InputPanel. However, the libraries are not exact copies of the .NET Framework. The ones in the .NET Compact Framework are scaled down to take up less space.
It is possible to develop applications which use the .NET Compact Framework in Visual Studio.NET 2003, in Visual Studio 2005 and in Visual Studio 2008, in C# or Visual Basic.NET. The resulting applications are designed to run on a special, mobile-device, high performance JIT compiler.
To be able to run applications powered by the .NET Compact Framework, the platform must support the Microsoft .NET Compact Framework runtime. Some operating systems which do include .NET CF are Windows CE 4.1, Microsoft Pocket PC, Microsoft Pocket PC 2002 and Smartphone 2003. .NET Compact Framework applications can be run on desktop computers with the full .NET Framework as long as they only access the shared parts of both frameworks, though their user interface can not be upgraded to look like that of an application developed for desktop PCs.
The Microsoft .NET Compact Framework 3.5 Redistributable contains the common language runtime and class libraries built for the .NET Compact Framework. In addition to version 3.5 support, it also supports applications developed for version 1.0 and 2.0. The .NET Compact Framework 3.5 provides new features such as Windows Communication Foundation, LINQ, SoundPlayer, new runtime tool support, and many other features.
A version of the .NET Compact Framework is also available for the Xbox 360 console. While it features the same runtime as the regular .NET CF, only a subset of the class library is available.[1] This version is used by XNA Framework to run managed games on the console. There are other limitations as well, such as the number of threads being limited to 256.[2] Unlike other versions of .NET CF, the Xbox 360 version allows setting processor affinity to threads created.[3] The threads are scheduled among four concurrent threads running on the multiple processor cores of the system.[2]

The versions of the .NET Compact Framework installed on a Windows Mobile device can be determined by launching \Windows\cgacutil.exe and comparing the displayed list of version numbers to the table above. More than one version can be installed on a device simutaneously.



