Airsoft
Airsoft is a game in which participants eliminate opponents by hitting each other with spherical non-metallic pellets fired from a compressed-air gun (or airsoft gun) powered by gas, manual spring-load, or electrically powered gearbox.
Airsoft participants organize meetings at dedicated airsoft battlefields often adapted to provide walls, bunkers, trenches, buildings, towers, and other similar man-made field enhancements to offer realism analogous to real war environments.
Airsoft games vary greatly in style and composition depending on location, budget, and quantity of participants but often range from short-term skirmishes, organized scenarios, military simulations, or historical reenactments.
Combat situations on the battlefield often involve the use of common military tactics to achieve the objectives set in each game. Participants typically use varying types of non-lethal weaponry designed as replicas of real firearms, tactical gear, and accessories used by modern military and police organizations.

In 1970s Japan it was illegal to own a firearm, but there was a large interest in them. Because of this interest, manufacturers started to produce realistic looking spring-powered guns. These guns fired several calibers of plastic or rubber BBs, but were eventually standardized into 6 mm and 8 mm sizes. The early spring powered weapons then morphed into gas powered ones, using a variety of systems. The hobby then migrated to North America in the mid 1990s.[1] Then low powered spring guns transformed into Classic airsoft. About ten years after this time, Japan hit a recession just as AEGs, or automatic electric guns, hit the market. Many old manufacturers were lost, leaving Tokyo Marui, inventor of the AEG, as the primary manufacturer. Marui then invented an improved Hop up system, further improving the accuracy and range of the weapons. In the early 2000s, Classic Army of Hong Kong entered the scene and gradually improved its quality of guns until it now rivals Tokyo Marui. A few years later countless Chinese brands have flooded the market with cheap entry level weapons.



Also known as "Capture The Intelligence" this game mode involves taking some piece of equipment such as a briefcase or even just a flag. This game type can either be played as single flag or multi flag. In capture the flag with multiple flags, usually there is a base. Inside the base you could contain just a simple guard, or something like ammo behind a sheltered building. You usually put the flag at the base. Make sure to make it as hard as possible to get to and from the flag. In single flag, place the flag in the middle of the playing field. Build a small campout to make sure that you still have shelter, then your team and the enemy team fight for the single flag. To win capture the flag you have to take either your enemies flag or the neutral flag and take it back to your base.

"MilSim", short for Military Simulation, generally combines airsoft play with some military live-action role-playing elements. This type of play may be considered "hard core" by many players because of the above normal involvement required. Several goals or missions may be assigned to each team, along with a basic load-out (i.e., supply) of ammunition, rations, explosives, and radios.
A key element in MilSim games is the use of low-capacity magazines,[citation needed] replicating the actual magazine capactity of the 'real-steel' firearm the airsoft gun is replicating. Examples of which are the 30 round STANAG magazines of the M4, M16, Type 89, SCAR-L etc. As well as similar capacities for other common replicas.
The teams will remain in the field for the duration of play, only returning to a staging area or "safe zone" for medical emergencies or other special circumstances. Military simulation games often last several days. For example, the large Berget annual event in Sweden lasts for six days with no breaks. In large scale MilSim operations, players often use vehicles such as painted vans and trucks. In some cases, such as Operation Irene (an annual MilSim held in the midwest U.S.), real APCs and tanks are used. Such large scale events can take place in MOUT (Military Operations in Urban Terrain) facilities.
Airsoft games are not limited to MilSim or CQB, however. There are many alternate game scenarios.

Airsoft play employs an honor system whereby the players rely on each others' honesty to admit to being hit, because unlike paintballs, airsoft bbs do not leave visible marks on clothing.
The effect of a marking bb on the honor system is an addition to the game but does not remove "honor" from the game as it still remains with the player to choose whether or not to call his or her hits. Instead, it simply allows for verification when the need arises. For instance, depending on the muzzle velocity of the gun and distance from the shooter, the targeted player may not feel the impact.
Players are discouraged from calling out hits on an opponent - instead players are expected to signal a marshal to judge how effectively they have hit their opponent. Simulated 'knife kills' can, at the venue's discretion, be recognized when a player touches or taps an unaware opponent. This prevents the player being forced to shoot him or her at point-blank range. Similarly, a 'courtesy kill' occurs when a player refrains from shooting an opponent at close range while enforcing that opponent's surrender. Players are usually prohibited from firing blindly when not able to see their target, especially around corners. Players are expected to avoid the shooting of an opponent who has already admitted to being hit. Harsh language and forceful physical contact between players is strongly discouraged and even penalized. Players are expected to resolve disputes politely and with proper decorum.
All airsoft players are expected to acknowledge being hit, even if they are in doubt, by shouting "I'm hit" loudly, and raising their hand or gun high and/or displaying a 'hit indicator' while walking back to the safe zone. Paintball style "speedball" games may include the aforementioned hit markers. A hit indicator can be either a bright-colored cloth during daytime or a blinker or mini-flashlight when in dim light or darkness.

Kinetic energy is the energy that is transferred from the pellet to its target upon impact. One joule of energy will be transferred by a 0.20 g BB at 100 metres per second (330 ft/s).[1] A typical set of limits on guns might be 100 m/s (330 ft/s) for CQB, 125 m/s (410 ft/s) for outdoors, and 175 m/s (570 ft/s) for bolt action sniper rifles, all measured with a 0.20 g BB. The amount of kinetic energy depends on the weight of the BB and how fast the gun can propel it. Certain places play "no velocity limit" games.
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the energy limit for Airsoft guns is usually one joule (100 m/s with a 0.20 g, 6 mm BB) regardless of the type of game play.[2]
Most Airsoft guns are capable of shooting from 50 m/s (160 ft/s) to 125 m/s (410 ft/s), though it is also possible to purchase upgraded springs for some Airsoft guns that will enable up to 180 m/s (590 ft/s) projectile velocities.[3]
A hop-up unit, if present, puts backspin on the BB, generating lift and giving it a greater effective range. The range of any Airsoft gun depends on both the muzzle velocity and the amount of hop applied. Airsoft guns can have a range of 75 metres (250 ft) or more with the right combination of power, barrel, and ammunition as well as a good hop-up unit. A good hop-up unit can sometimes double the range.

The minimum safe level of gear required to participate in most games includes a pair of impact-rated goggles or shooting glasses to protect participants' eyes. Traditional prescription glasses and sunglasses, or goggles not designed specifically for use with airsoft or paintball guns may break or shatter upon being struck, causing eye damage.
Many airsoft groups and fields require that eye protection fully seals the area around the eyes, and also meets or exceeds ANSI's Z87.1-2003 goggle standard for eye protection, namely, the ability to absorb 3 joules of impact energy without damage. Some players instead opt for paintball goggles, which are held to a higher impact rating standard, ASTM's F1776.[4]
The best overall protection is offered by paintball masks. These masks protect the face, teeth, and ears. Some airsoft masks are made with mesh screens, though these screens do not offer protection from cheaper or bio-degradable pellets that sometimes fragment upon hitting hard objects.[5] While masks offer superior protection, they can interfere with the use of scopes and in cheaper masks, condensation inside the goggles can reduce visibility.

At most airsoft sites, any player or observer is required to keep their face mask, goggles, or shooting glasses on at all times. All players must immediately stop shooting when a person without eye protection is encountered in the playing area. One common practice is for players to shout words such as "Cease-fire, Blind Man!" Any player hearing the words must stop and repeat the alarm, alerting the whole game.

Some other rules such as a maximum BB velocity and distance guidelines are used by different groups. Some organizations have created common safety rules and guidelines.[6]
When not actively playing, some fields require "barrel bags," also known as barrel stoppers, which were first introduced in paintball. The magazine is usually removed as well, and the gun fired to clear the chamber. Many fields also require players to leave their guns set to the safety position when they are not shooting, a practice common when using real firearms. In certain countries, such as the Philippines, additional special rules have been adopted.[7]
All "real steel" firearms, explosives, and bladed weapons are banned at any airsoft battlefield to prevent harmful accidents or confusion between real and simulated weapons. Players are expected to be discreet in transporting their gear and uniforms so as not to alarm the public or police. Pyrotechnic devices may be allowed, but are rarely employed, because of the added danger.

There are many organized teams, of varying sizes, all over the USA and in various countries. Some prominent teams have 50 or more players, and are able to send delegations to regional or national events. In the Philippines, there are many amorphous groups of airsoft players loosely organized into "teams" that of varying sizes. There have been attempts to create large nationwide organizations of airsofters but these have not succeeded nor persisted in the past.

Airsoft guns and playing airsoft is legal in most parts of the world. Some countries have specific restrictions [8] such as maximum muzzle velocity, aka FPS (feet per second), rules against using the trademarks of real firearms, and 'unrealistic' coloring to distinguish them from actual firearms. They are legal throughout the U.S, but restrictions exist in certain cities such as Camden, Newark, NJ, Chicago, IL, New York City and Detroit, MI. The states of New Jersey, Illinois, New York and Michigan, however, do not allow airsoft guns to be used and handled publicly, because of the resemblance to real firearms, although Federal and State laws generally regard airsoft guns as toys and in the United States the muzzle tip must be orange.
In the United Kingdom, airsoft replicas are classified as realistic imitation firearms or RIFs. The sale, manufacture or importation of RIFs are restricted to activities that are exempted or have been granted a defense by the Home Office under the Violent Criminal Reduction Act. Airsoft has been granted a defense and a skirmisher as defined under British law is allowed to purchase, manufacture or import airsoft replicas. Usually, the only accepted method of proving entitlement is to be a member of a site that holds public liability insurance. A scheme set up by UK retailers, called UKARA, recommends that an airsoft site only give membership to a player who has played at least three games over a period of no less than two months. The right to own a RIF is still reserved to over 18's.[9] Many retailers will only sell airsoft replicas to UKARA registered players. Also, the use or possession of any kind of replica weapon, loaded or otherwise in a public place is an offense under UK law and can carry heavy penalties. [10]
Some airsoft players inform local police where and when airsoft games will take place, so that misunderstandings can be avoided.
Due to a steady entry of lower-cost airsoft guns from abroad, the Philippine National Police issued in December 2007 its Circular 11 (Airsoft Implementing Rules and Regulations),[11] regulating the ownership of airsoft guns by Filipino citizens. Only airsoft guns with a muzzle velocity of 550 feet (170 m) per second (ft/s) or less using 0.2-g BBs can be registered. The PNP AIRR also regulates the operation of airsoft playing fields, teams, and the standardized rules and codes of conduct among airsoft players.

American federal laws require minimum 6 mm (approx. 1/4") orange tips to be present on all "toy guns" (including airsoft replicas) transported within and imported into the United States.[12]
However, these orange tips can be easily covered or painted over. One prominent case occurred in Longwood, Florida when a student threatened fellow classmates with an airsoft pistol and was subsequently shot dead when he aimed it towards an officer. The orange tip mandated by US Federal law had been painted black.[13] Airsoft players will generally avoid using the orange tip on their guns because it makes them more visible at a distance when they play. According to the New Times Broward-Palm Beach, "Federal regulations state that fake guns must be sold with orange tips. But there's nothing in the books to prevent airsoft owners from painting those tips black or, for that matter, from painting orange tips onto real guns."[14] However, despite the lack of federal penalties for consumers who remove the required orange tips, some states (such as California) have enacted state legislation that does impose criminal penalties for the removal of any required markings. [15]

Many Mil-Sim players choose to wear real gear (not an airsoft replica) and in some cases, real ballistic protective armor - this can raise the price of the game considerably.

The guns used in airsoft are typically replicas of real firearms, except that they have a mechanism for pushing out projectiles 6 mm or 8 mm in diameter.
Airsoft guns are classified according to their operating principle which can be either: spring, electric, or gas-powered. An airsoft gun is selected according to the level of performance (battery life, range, rate of fire, accuracy, reliability, customization, magazine capacity, size, and weight) or realism the player requires. Early-generation airsoft guns were mostly "springers." Single action airsoft guns are almost always semi-auto and never auto. Second-generation airsoft guns had gas-powered mechanisms that required either an internal "Flon" (CFC) gas reservoir or an external high-pressure CO2 chamber. AEGs (automatic electric guns, such as assault rifles) are now the most commonly used and have high-capacity rechargeable batteries to operate gearboxes that displace air to propel the BBs.
Most airsoft pistols which are gas-powered use environmentally safe "green gas", Green gas is propane gas with a hint of perfume and sometimes "lubricant" and produces a realistic blowback recoil effect when fired. Recently Airsoft manufacturers have begun producing propane adapters that screw directly onto camping grade propane tanks, allowing players to power their gas guns on pure propane, as a cheaper alternative to "green gas". Each pistol magazine contains a small storage gas cylinder with enough power to propel the 30+ BB projectiles also housed in the magazine. Thus a player can realistically load, fire, and unload an airsoft pistol with similar realism as a "real steel" semi-automatic pistol. A few early-production AEPs (Airsoft Electric Pistols) have been released but these suffer from weaker BB velocities because of the difficulty of fitting a small-enough motor in the housing of a pistol, although the range is sometimes greater than a gas pistol. AEP's often have a higher rate of fire than their gas counterparts.
Most early airsoft guns were completely made of ABS plastic except for some internal moving parts. Newer guns, especially those made in China, have metal external parts. A typical airsoft gun is noticeably lighter than its "real steel" counterpart due to the use of aluminium, alloy, and plastic, though some have weights in them for a more realistic feel. There are smoke caps available for certain airsoft guns for added realism.
Gas hand gun magazines range from a capacity of 15-30 bbs. In the case of AEG rifles magazines come in either standard (equivalent to the capacity of its real steel counterpart), low-capacity (low caps: 40-80 BBs), mid-capacity (mid caps: 80-150 BBs), or high-capacity (high caps: 200-500+ BBs). These magazines are spring loaded; the high-cap magazines often have a ratchet wheel that can be wound up periodically to force BBs up the magazine feed chute, but due to their length and weight these magazines usually don't fit perfectly in the gun's magazine well, often make a rattling noise when running or walking. Some airsoft guns have electric-powered box or drum magazines that hold thousands of BBs (sometimes up to 5000).

Players can use grenades, grenade launchers, smoke grenades, mines, and replica claymores that use
