Vanguard: Saga of Heroes
Vanguard: Saga of Heroes is a high fantasy-themed massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) created by Sigil Games Online, and now developed and run by Sony Online Entertainment. Originally, the game was co-published by Sony Online Entertainment (SOE), and the company producing it, Sigil Games Online. The game was released on January 30, 2007, with an early access date of January 26, 2007 for pre-order customers. On May 15, 2007, it was announced in a press release that Sony Online Entertainment had completed a transaction to purchase key assets of Sigil Games Online, including all rights to Vanguard [1][2].
The game initially sold around 242,000 copies, while the number of active subscriptions (those who play longer than the free month included when buying the game) was estimated to be around 130,000[3], to drop in the next months to about 40,000[4].
Following the aquisation by SOE, the developers mainly focused on bug fixes and gameplay improvements for a long time. In July 2008, the developers announced they wanted to attract old and new players as the game had reached a much more presentable state[5]. On September 10, 2008, Game Update 6[6] finally introduced the long awaited trial island, the Isle of Dawn, which also quickly became the standard starting area for new regular characters. On October 8, 2008, the trial version was released[7][8].
On Mar 12 2009, SOE announced their will to add the controversial feature of ingame support for goldselling, i.e. trading game money, items, and even whole characters, for real money, between players[9]. Minor protests from the playerbase[10], especially from the european customers[11], have not been commented upon from official sources.

The game is packaged on PC DVDs, and though the retail price varies, it can be typically seen for approximately $10-20 at retail stores. As of June 2008, there are eBay sellers selling the collector's edition for approx $9.00 + shipping. Vanguard is also available for purchase through download from SOE or from third-party web hosts.
There were two different versions of the game released. A standard version, and a more expensive, feature-rich collector's edition. The special collector's edition contained a Guild Kit, art book, cloth map, soundtrack CD and 3-month Station Player subscription, plus a special Hero Card and in-game player item. The collector's edition also contained ten buddy keys, or free trials, that when given to a friend will allow them to test the game out for 10 days. If they decide that they wish to continue playing, they will not lose their character, and can opt to purchase the game and continue their account.
Like many large-scale MMORPGs, Vanguard has a monthly fee to pay for bandwidth, server maintenance, and new content. A one month subscription costs US $14.99 as of November 2008. Users can pay an optional premium for access to additional web-based features. Vanguard is also part of the Sony Online Entertainment Station Access package, for which users can pay a single $29.99 monthly fee for access to several SOE online games.

As with any MMORPG, Characters in Vanguard: Saga of Heroes are a player's avatar in the game environment. Twelve characters can be created on a regular account (increased from 8 in GU6). At creation, the name, gender, race and adventuring class of the character are chosen and will not be changeable later. The character's appearance is also chosen, but can be modified by the player at any time thereafter, from the character selection screen. After his or her creation, the character can start play either in the starting area of his or her chosen race or in the trial zone called the Isle of Dawn. The character can pick a crafter class and two harvester skills within the game, but is not forced to do so.

There are 19 races, listed in the geography section below. Races differ in appearance, special abilities, diplomatic affinity, and adventuring class selection. To help distinguish the races (aside from looks), every race has also one special active ability that unlocks at a certain level (between level 1 and 12, depending upon race).

Vanguard offers three primary areas of play: 'Adventuring', 'Crafting', and 'Diplomacy', which are called 'spheres'. There is also a fourth, very limited sphere, 'Harvesting', which has no level or quests except the introduction quest. The maximum level in each of the other three spheres is 50. These spheres function mostly independently. There are no restrictions on the spheres other than adventuring due to race or adventuring class.
Each of these four spheres has its own equipment tab on the character window, which allows the player to equip the gear set appropriate to the activities they wish to perform without carrying around different sets of gear in their bags. Once a character performs an action in a sphere, he automatically switches to the corresponding equipment set, and his visual display changes likewise.

The Adventuring sphere features the traditional set of MMORPG activities: completing quests, exploring dungeons and killing mobs. Quest rewards are usually more significant than what is normally obtained in other MMORPGs, or by simply killing mobs, discouraging 'grinding'. Advancements in Adventuring are achieved through obtaining "adventuring experience points". Solo and casual advancement is possible, but the best rewards and fastest progress come from group content.
In general, the majority of the classes in Vanguard are 'hybrid' classes (as compared to the initial classes made famous by Dungeons & Dragons). Most classes have some healing ability, magical spell casting abilities or the ability to 'buff' themselves and other group members with enhancing spells. One result of this is that many successful dungeon exploration groups can be formed out of various different combinations of classes.
The hybrid nature of many classes makes them more complex than classes in some other MMORPGs, with an abundance of abilities to learn.
In combat the different classes have abilities that depend on other classes to achieve maximum results. Every class can use abilities that cause one or more brief vulnerabilities to be applied to the target. Other class-specific attacks or spells take advantage of specific vulnerabilities and inflict extra damage. (A complete list of the vulnerabilities can be found on the Ten Ton Hammer web site [2].) Although this system is both fully implemented and highly effective, most world content is not challenging enough to require that it be used, and some players disregard it; but while regular gaming does not require that attention be paid to it, some dungeons and much raid content is difficult enough to make it desirable to utilize.
Characters have attributes and skills which can be increased with leveling. All classes have reserves or 'pools' of 'health', 'endurance' and 'energy' which they rely on to survive (except the monk and rogue classes who lack an energy pool). Health and energy increase when levels and attributes increase, but endurance (without buffs) is locked at a hundred points throughout the game.
The game allows class customization to a certain extent. Starting at level 10, characters are rewarded with points which can be spent to increase their attributes. Some classes are given 'specialist paths' at certain levels (usually 15 or 30), which influence the way they play the game by offering them new abilities and encouraging them to alter their equipment and attributes to take advantage of these. There are also 'learned abilities' to be acquired by 'studying' certain mobs, and some from dropped items looted from high-level mobs.
There are currently 15 adventuring classes to choose from:
Probably the most unusual class designs of Vanguard are the Monk and Disciple, which feature a fight system that accumulates a counter called 'Jin' through several abilities, which can be spent on other, more powerful abilities. The Blood Mage who has a similar system called "blood points" and comes with a large set of abilities to redistribute damage in various ways.
Much of Vanguard's class system is designed for groups. All of the classes can perform one of the three major MMORPG roles: tank, healer, or damage dealer. All tanks and healers are supposed to perform their job about as well as their peers, although in specific situations one class will be better than another. DPS classes vary in their roles: the Bard, while it belongs to the offensive fighter group, is more of a support class and crowd control specialist than a pure damage dealer.
Solo play is possible, but, as in many MMORPGs, the classes differ in their solo performance because of the unequal distribution of crucial abilities. Typical soloing strategies, such as self-healing, kiting and fear kiting , are only available to some classes; likewise, controlling fights with crowd control, avoiding fights with stealth or invisibility, and terminating lost fights with fake death or emergency evacuation teleports is not possible for all classes. Some classes, such as the Necromancer, have more soloing options, while some others, like the Warrior, are more narrowly focused.

Player vs Player (PvP) is possible on the Sartok PvP server, or on PvE servers using the /duel command (you do not gain any reward for winning a duel), but the adventuring classes have not been designed with this in mind, and this aspect of gameplay is not currently a priority for the developers. Vanguard classes are therefore not balanced with PvP in mind, and some classes are more capable in this regard than others. For example, the maximum damage of a single attack is restricted to 40% of the maximum hitpoints of a attackee, but certain classes can combine multiple instant attacks, resulting in the possibility to kill other classes in one turn with no chance for the victim to fight back.

The second sphere of Vanguard is Crafting, and involves creating in-game items using 'recipes' and raw materials. Crafting recipes are a set of actions that must be performed in a particular order to produce a final result. Each of these actions costs 'action points', taken from an action pool. The maximum number of action points available varies with each recipe. During the crafting process, 'complications' may arise which affect the crafting process, usually, but not always negatively. The crafter can attempt to correct complications or resume crafting and deal with the consequences or benefits of ignoring the complications.
It is possible to advance the Crafting sphere without engaging in adventuring or combat, and without funneling harvested raw materials from experienced Adventuring characters to the crafter. Crafting experience comes primarily from work orders and crafting quests. Work Orders are commissioned by NPCs who provide raw materials. The crafter then produces the requested items, receiving Crafting experience, money, and possibly items or recipes in return. Crafting proficiency is not represented simply through skill advancement, but uses an experience/level system much like adventuring. Each work order or quest gives an amount of experience. When a player earns enough experience, they gain an additional Crafting level. Every ten levels crafters can start working with a new tier of resources to create more items after they complete a training quest.
Vanguard's Crafting currently has three styles of items that can be made, each local to one continent. The styles offer different types of bonuses on created items, have different appearance when worn, and each has unique items not available in the other styles. A Kojani style sword looks different from a Thestran or Qalian style sword, and may have different bonuses. To learn the different styles of recipes, crafters will have to complete quests on each continent and earn 'faction' with the local artisans/crafters of each. For some items, such as player-owned boats, housing and guild halls, significant faction is required for that continent's artisans to be able to create those items. Thus crafters are able to create only certain types of housing or ships. The most dedicated crafters are able to craft styles of items from all three continents.
There are three crafting classes and each of these has two specializations. The player can choose a specialization when they reach level 11 in the 'parent' crafter class. It is possible to switch specializations, but doing so will permanently remove all recipes of that specialization, including any rare and difficult to obtain recipes. Repeatedly switching between specializations is not recommended, but the opportunity to change is available. While changing specialization is possible without having too severe a penalty, changing the parent class carries a substantial penalty: being reset to level 1 with no skills, basically losing all the work done in that original class. Since crafting can be done independently of the other spheres, it's generally better to start a new character if you wish to change classes instead of wiping the old skill with an existing character. The crafting classes are Outfitter (Tailor or Leatherworker), Artificer (Carpenter or Mineralogist), and Blacksmith (Armorsmith or Weaponsmith)
While each specialization has various types of items that they can create, as well as sharing some items with their corresponding classmate, in general Tailors craft Light Armor and backpacks; Leatherworkers craft Medium Armor and Saddlebags; Carpenters craft ships, housing parts, focuses, and wood weapons; Mineralogists craft stone weapons, jewelry, focuses, and housing materials; Armorsmiths craft Heavy Armor and Horseshoes; and Weaponsmiths craft Metal weapons and Horseshoes. Each class also can craft various expendable items which provide buffs and utility effects, ship and housing parts, and other items. At very high levels some crafters can obtain special recipes to assist adventurers in creating materials used to upgrade their quest armor.

'Diplomacy' is a concept unique to, or at least first introduced by, Vanguard. It is basically a card game inspired in style and rules by collectable card games. Diplomats can enable certain city wide 'civic' buffs and gain certain special items needed for end-game content such as Guild Houses, the Griffon Mount, and other important end-game quests.
A diplomatic encounter, called a 'parley', consists of two opponents and their currently selected cards: the deck. Both start with a certain amount of dialogue points, where the initial number depends upon the difficulty, and the diplomatic level of the opponents. The two opponents move in turn, by either playing a card, or listening. The goal of the game is to move the parley marker into a certain area, and keeping it there. This decreases their own dialogue points every time one of the opponents plays a move. The game is won when the character's own dialogue points reach zero. Cards have various properties and effects, such as moving the parley marker by a certain amount, having a cost in expression points, giving, or taking expression points from the player or its opponent, and a time restriction before the card can be played again. Some additional text is displayed during a parley in a separate window, but plays no relevance in the game itself.
Aside from some special procs such as initially moving the marker or letting the player start with some initial expression, diplomatic clothing has very little effect on the encounter itself, though it can have a huge impact on the ability to start parleys and to decide the strengths of the effects of a successful parley. Both gear and cards can be gained from diplomatic quests, parleys and parley rewards, but some can be crafted and there are also some adventuring drops, especially for the cards. Infamous, for example is the smelly cat in Ahgram, Qalia (which is level 40). It attacks anyone carrying a fish in their inventory and drops diplomatic gear upon death.
The Diplomacy Sphere was an ambitious attempt to create something entirely new in the gaming world but its actual implementation has fallen short of the designers stated goals. Many other purposes for diplomacy where planned, but never implemented, such as an important role for the player to build cities[12]. As of this time, there is no PvP element to Diplomacy, but it has been stated that the system was designed with the goal of players being able to 'duel' diplomatically in mind.[13] However, diplomacy is regarded as one of the least well integrated parts of the game.
As a character advances through Diplomacy he or she earns titles that can be displayed front of the character name, e.g. 'Messenger' or 'Ambassador'. These titles represent skill levels, not classes. Diplomacy 'classes', or areas of specialization, have been mentioned as a possible future design element but are not currently part of the game.
In addition to skill levels, which are gained by performing any Parley, Diplomats must also manage Presence. Presence represents the character's status in a part of the community (called a 'Station') such as Crafters, Outsiders, or Academics. Status accrues slowly by parleying with people of the appropriate station, but the majority of Presence gains come from clothing- a Diplomat might wear a ragged shirt to raise Outsider Presence or Silk Pants to raise Noble Presence.
Performing Parleys usually results in a reward of "Information", such as "Rumor of Blackmail" or "Evidence of Trends". When enough of these items have been collected, they can be turned in to certain NPCs to receive cash, clothing, or items. At present, no actual information is gained, merely an item in the character's inventory with an appropriate name. That is, receiving a "Rumor of Arcana" will not reveal to the player any additional information about the game world.

Harvesting forms a fourth, simple sphere. Characters have a general harvest skill, which controls how well one can help others with their harvest, and can choose two out of five harvest types they want to specialize in, out of the pool of Mining Metal Ore, Quarrying Stone Slabs and Gemstone Samples, Lumberjacking Wood Timbers, Skinning Leather Hides, and Reaping Cloth Bales. Rechoosing these skills is possible, but all previous progress is then lost.
Harvest resources are placed on predefined locations in the game world. There are six tiers of harvest, each with an increased required skill level for harvesting it. Higher tiers of harvest have a chance for rare or even ultra rare harvest, which is needed for upgrading crafted items to higher qualities.

Vanguard is set in a high fantasy world called "Telon", unusual among MMO worlds in that it is almost entirely persistent, with no instancing or load screens. Telon does not have "zones" in the manner of most fantasy MMOs, but there are discrete areas, sometimes called "chunks" which delineate content to some extent and serve to provide general geographical reference points. The world contains 19 playable races, many of which are drawn from or inspired by traditional high fantasy sources such as the work of J. R. R. Tolkien and the tabletop fantasy roleplaying game Dungeons & Dragons.

There are three "continents" on the world of Telon. Each is reachable by direct, contiguous travel from the other continents, via air or sea, or by NPC boat (with a load screen,) from the major ports of call.
Thestra – Thestra is a land resembling northern and eastern Europe, with mountains, wetlands, forests and misty, haunted coastlines. Thestra is home to the major cities of New Targonor, the human capital, Bordinar's Cleft, the mountain home of the Dwarves, and Leth Nurae, elegant home of the High Elves. The famous Ancient Port Warehouse raid area is located at the southwest end of Thestra, and the continent is home to several major dunegons, including the Fallen Lyceum, the Ruins of Vol Tuniel and Trengal Keep. Races native to Thestra include the medieval-styled Thestran Humans, High Elves, Dwarves, Lesser Giants, Halflings, Vulmane (wolflike humanoids) and Varanjar (Scandiavian-styled human barbarians).
Kojan – Kojan is an archiapelago with an Asiatic flavor, comprised of many small islands, some of which are utterly barren, while others are home to communities of inscrutable wizards and unusual races. Kojan only supports play up to roughly level 25. Races native to Kojan include the Kojani (Asian-styled humans), Half-Elves and Wood Elves (both of which also have an Asian flavor,) Raki (very short, fox-like humanoids), Goblins, and Orcs. Kojan hosts a number of dungeons including Lord Tsang's Tomb, Magi Hold and the Temple of Ghalnn, and is home to two major cities: Tawar Galan and Martok, island capital of the Orcs and Goblins.
Qalia - This southern continent (pronounced KAY-lee-uh) has an atmosphere reminiscent of the Middle East and North Africa, with great deserts and rugged mountains. Races native to Qalia include the Qaliathari (vaguely Arabian, desert-dwelling humans,) Mordebi (dark-skinned, African-styled humans,) Dark Elves, Gnomes, Kurashasa (tiger- or panther-like humanoids), and Varanthari (Turkic/Mongolian style human barbarians.) It is home to the major cities of Khal and Aghram and several significant dungeons and outdoor adventure areas, including the Coterie Infineum Sanctuary, Skawlra Rock, the Grotto of the Sea Hags and the Pantheon of the Ancients.
There are two other noteworthy separate areas:

There are various ways to travel through Telon, besides simple walking on land. Each of these serve different purposes.

