Japan
Japan (Êó•Êú¨ Nihon or Nippon?, officially Êó•Êú¨ÂõΩ  Nippon-koku or Nihon-koku) is an island nation in East Asia. Located in the Pacific Ocean, it lies to the east of the Sea of Japan, People's Republic of China, North Korea, South Korea and Russia, stretching from the Sea of Okhotsk in the north to the East China Sea and Taiwan in the south. The characters which make up Japan's name mean "sun-origin", which is why Japan is sometimes identified as the "Land of the Rising Sun".
Japan comprises over 3,000 islands[5] making it an archipelago. The four largest islands are Honsh≈´, Hokkaid≈ç, Ky≈´sh≈´ and Shikoku, together accounting for 97% of Japan's land area. Most of the islands are mountainous, many volcanic; for example, Japan‚Äôs highest peak, Mount Fuji, is a volcano. Japan has the world's tenth largest population, with about 128†million people. The Greater Tokyo Area, which includes the de facto capital city of Tokyo and several surrounding prefectures, is the largest metropolitan area in the world, with over 30 million residents.
Archaeological research indicates that people were living on the islands of Japan as early as the Upper Paleolithic period. The first written mention of Japan begins with brief appearances in Chinese history texts from the first century†A.D. Influence from the outside world followed by long periods of isolation has characterized Japan's history. Since adopting its constitution in 1947, Japan has maintained a unitary constitutional monarchy with an emperor and an elected parliament, the Diet.
A major economic power,[6] Japan has the world's second largest economy by nominal GDP and the third largest in purchasing power parity. It is a member of the United Nations, G8, OECD and APEC, with the world's fifth largest defense budget. It is also the world's fourth largest exporter and sixth largest importer. It is a developed country with high living standards (8th highest HDI), the longest life expectancy in the world (according to UN estimates).[7]

The English word Japan is an exonym. The Japanese names for Japan are Nippon („Å´„Å£„ÅΩ„Çì ?) and Nihon („Å´„Åª„Çì ?). They are both written in Japanese using the kanji Êó•Êú¨. The Japanese name Nippon is used for most official purposes, including on Japanese money, postage stamps, and for many international sporting events. Nihon is a more casual term and the most frequently used in contemporary speech.
Both Nippon and Nihon literally mean "the sun's origin" and are often translated as the Land of the Rising Sun. This nomenclature comes from Imperial correspondence with Chinese Sui Dynasty and refers to Japan's eastward position relative to China. Before Japan had relations with China, it was known as Yamato and Hi no moto, which means "source of the sun".[8]
The English word for Japan came to the West from early trade routes. The early Mandarin or possibly Wu Chinese (ÂëâË™û) word for Japan was recorded by Marco Polo as Cipangu. In modern Shanghainese, a Wu dialect, the pronunciation of characters Êó•Êú¨ 'Japan' is Zeppen [z…ô îp…ôn]; in Wu, the character Êó• has two pronunciations, informal (ÁôΩËÆÄ ?) [ni î] and formal (ÊñáËÆÄ ?) [z…ô î]. (In some southern Wu dialects, Êó•Êú¨ is pronounced [ni îp…ôn], similar to its pronunciation in Japanese.) The old Malay word for Japan, Jepang (now spelled Jepun in Malaysia, though still spelled Jepang in Indonesia), was borrowed from a Chinese language, and this Malay word was encountered by Portuguese traders in Malacca in the 16th century. It is thought the Portuguese traders were the first to bring the word to Europe. It was first recorded in English in a 1565 letter spelled Giapan. For more information on this, please see the Wiktionary etymology for the word "Japan".

The first signs of occupation on the Japanese Archipelago appeared with a Paleolithic culture around 30,000†BC, followed from around 14,000†BC by the J≈çmon period, a Mesolithic to Neolithic semi-sedentary hunter-gatherer culture of pit dwelling and a rudimentary form of agriculture. Decorated clay vessels from this period, often with plaited patterns, are some of the oldest surviving examples of pottery in the world.
The Yayoi period, starting around the third century†BC, saw the introduction of many new practices, such as wet-rice farming[9], from China and [Korea]].
The Japanese first appear in written history in China‚Äôs Book of Han. According to the Chinese Records of Three Kingdoms, the most powerful kingdom on the archipelago during the third century was called Yamataikoku.
Buddhism was first introduced to Japan from Baekje of the Korean Peninsula, but the subsequent development of Japanese Buddhism and Buddhist sculptures were primarily influenced by China.[10] Despite early resistance, Buddhism was promoted by the ruling class and eventually gained growing acceptance since the Asuka period.[11]
The Nara period of the eighth century marked the first emergence of a strong central Japanese state, centered on an imperial court in the city of Heij≈ç-ky≈ç, or modern day Nara. In addition to the continuing adoption of Chinese administrative practices, the Nara period is characterized by the appearance of a nascent written literature with the completion of the massive chronicles Kojiki (712) and Nihon Shoki (720).[12] (Nara was not the first capital city in Japan, though. Before Nara, Fujiwara-ky≈ç and Asuka served as capitals of the Yamato state.)
In 784, Emperor Kammu moved the capital from Nara to Nagaoka-ky≈ç for a brief ten-year period, before relocating it to Heian-ky≈ç (modern day Kyoto) in 794, where it remained for more than a millennium.[13] This marked the beginning of the Heian period, during which time a distinctly indigenous Japanese culture emerged, noted for its art, poetry and literature. Lady Murasaki's The Tale of Genji and the lyrics of modern Japan's national anthem, Kimi ga Yo were written during this time.[14]
Japan's feudal era was characterized by the emergence of a ruling class of warriors, the samurai. In 1185, following the defeat of the rival Taira clan, Minamoto no Yoritomo was appointed Shogun and established a base of power in Kamakura. After Yoritomo's death, the H≈çj≈ç clan came to rule as regents for the shoguns. Zen Buddhism was introduced from China in the Kamakura period (1185‚Äì1333) and became popular among the samurai class. The Kamakura shogunate managed to repel Mongol invasions in 1274 and 1281, aided by a storm that the Japanese interpreted as a kamikaze, or Divine Wind. The Kamakura shogunate was eventually overthrown by Emperor Go-Daigo, who was soon himself defeated by Ashikaga Takauji in 1336.[15] The succeeding Ashikaga shogun
