Suez Crisis
United Nations cease-fire
UNEF occupation of Sinai[1]
Straits of Tiran re-opened to Israeli shipping
1920 Palestine riots†‚Äì 1921 in Jaffa†‚Äì 1929 Palestine riots†‚Äì Arab revolt (1936‚Äì1939)†‚Äì Civil War (1947‚Äì1948)†‚Äì Arab-Israeli War (1948‚Äì1949)†‚Äì Suez Crisis (1956)†‚Äì War over Water (1964-1967)†‚Äì Six-Day War (1967)†‚Äì War of Attrition (1968‚Äì1970)†‚Äì Yom Kippur War (1973)†‚Äì South Lebanon conflict (1978)†‚Äì Lebanon War (1982)†‚Äì South Lebanon conflict (1982‚Äì2000)†‚Äì First Intifada (1987‚Äì1991)†‚Äì Second Intifada (2000-2008)†‚Äì Lebanon War (2006)†‚Äì Israel‚ÄìGaza conflict (2008‚Äì2009)
The Suez Crisis, also referred to as the Tripartite Aggression,[4] (Arabic: ÿ£ÿ≤ŸÖÿ© ÿßŸÑÿ≥ŸàŸäÿ≥ - ÿßŸÑÿπÿØŸàÿßŸÜ ÿßŸÑÿ´ŸÑÿßÿ´Ÿä‚Äé  æAzmat al-S≈´wais/Al- øIdwƒÅn al-ThalƒÅthƒ´; French: Crise du canal de Suez; Hebrew: ◊û◊ë◊¶◊¢ ◊ß◊ì◊©‚Äé Kadesh Campaign, or ◊û◊ú◊ó◊û◊™ ◊°◊ô◊†◊ô Sinai War) was a military attack on Egypt by Britain, France, and Israel beginning on 29 October 1956.[5][6] The attack followed Egypt's decision of 26 July 1956 to nationalize the Suez Canal after the withdrawal of an offer by Britain and the United States to fund the building of the Aswan Dam.[7]

The Suez Canal was opened in 1869, having been financed by the French and Egyptian governments.[8] Technically, the area surrounding the canal proper was sovereign Egyptian territory, and the operating company, the Universal Company of the Suez Maritime Canal (Suez Canal Company) was an Egyptian-chartered company.
The canal was strategically important to the British, and hence to the other European powers. To Britain, the canal was the ocean link with her colonies in India, the Far East, Australia, and New Zealand. Because the canal was of such strategic significance, the area as a whole gained enormous importance. Thus, in 1875, the British government of Benjamin Disraeli bought the Egyptian shares of the Suez Canal operating company, obtaining partial control of the canal's operations and sharing it with mostly-French private investors. In 1882, during the invasion and occupation of Egypt, the United Kingdom took de facto control of the canal proper, finance and operation.
The 1888 Convention of Constantinople declared the canal a neutral zone under British protection.[9] In ratifying it, the Ottoman Empire agreed to permit international shipping to pass freely through the canal, in time of war and peace.[10]
The Suez Canal proved its strategic importance during the Russo-Japanese War when Japan entered into an agreement with Britain. The Japanese launched a surprise attack on the Russian Pacific Fleet based at Port Arthur. When the Russians sent reinforcements from the Baltic, the British denied them access to the canal. This forced the Russian fleet to steam around the entire continent of Africa, giving the Japanese forces time to re-group and solidify their position in the Far East.
The importance of the canal as a strategic center was also apparent during both World Wars. In the First World War, the Britain and France closed the canal to non-Allied shipping. During the Second World War, the Suez Canal was tenaciously defended in the North African Campaign.
Petroleum business historian Daniel Yergin wrote:
[I]n 1948, the canal abruptly lost its traditional rationale.... [C]ontrol over the canal could no longer be preserved on grounds that it was critical to the defense either of India or of an empire that was being liquidated. And yet, at exactly the same moment, the canal was gaining a new role ‚Äî as the highway not of empire, but of oil.... By 1955, petroleum accounted for half of the canal's traffic, and, in turn, two thirds of Europe's oil passed through it.[11]
In May 1948, the British Mandate of Palestine ended, and British forces withdrew from the region. A Israel declared independence was made for the territory partitioned by UNSCOP (United Nations Special Committee on Palestine) and the Jewish state of Israel came into being. The Arab League immediately declared its refusal to recognize both the UN resolution and the two-state solution, favoring a one-state solution run by an Arab majority, and including Jewish and Arab territories. This led to the first 1948 Arab-Israeli War from which Israel emerged victorious over the Arabs, including Egypt. Failed peace talks in the aftermath of the war, combined with escalating border violence between Israel and its immediate neighbours in the following years, helped to perpetuate Arab-Israeli enmity.
See also History of Israel, History of Egypt


At the outset of the 1950s, Great Britain, the predominant foreign power in the Middle East, was reassessing its role in the region. The economic potential of the Middle East, with its vast oil reserves and the Suez Canal, as well as its geo-strategic importance against the background of the Cold War, prompted Britain to consolidate and strengthen its position there. Vital to maintaining British influence in the region were the kingdoms of Egypt and Iraq.
Britain's military strength was spread throughout the region, including the vast military complex at Suez with a garrison of some 80,000[12] making it one of the largest military installations in the world. The Suez base was considered an important part of Britain's strategic position in the Middle East yet, increasingly, it become a source of growing tension in Anglo-Egyptian relations. In the wake of the Second World War, Egypt's domestic politics were experiencing a radical change, prompted in no small part by economic instability, inflation and unemployment. Unrest began to manifest itself in the growth of radical political groups, such as the Communist Party and the Muslim Brotherhood, and an increasingly hostile attitude towards Britain and her presence in the country. Added to this anti-British fervour was the perceived role Britain had held in the creation of Israel.[13]As such, the actions of the Egyptian government began to mirror those of its populace and an anti-British policy began to permeate Egypt's relations with Britain.
In October 1951, the Egyptian government unilaterally abrogated the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, the terms of which granted Britain a lease on the Suez base for 20 years.[14] Britain refused to withdraw from Suez relying upon its impinged treaty rights, as well as the sheer presence of the Suez garrison. The price of such a course of action was a steady escalation in increasingly violent hostility towards Britain, and British troops in Egypt, which the Egyptian authorities did little to curb. On 25 January 1952, British attempts to disarm a troublesome auxiliary police force barracks in Ismailia resulted in the deaths of 41 Egyptians[15]. This in turn led to anti-Western riots in Cairo resulting in heavy damage to property and the deaths of several foreigners, including 11 British citizens.[16] This proved to be a catalyst for the removal of the Egyptian monarchy. On 23 July 1952 a military coup by the 'Free Officers Movement'- led by Muhammad Neguib and future Egyptian President Gamal Abdul Nasser - overthrew King Farouk and established an Egyptian republic.
Since the establishment of Israel in 1948, cargo shipments to and from Israel were intercepted, removed and / or destroyed by the Egyptians while attempting to pass through the Suez Canal. On 1 September 1951, the UN Security Council called upon Egypt: "... to terminate the restrictions on the passage of international commercial ships and goods through the Suez Canal, wherever bound, and to cease all interference with such shipping." This interference, contrary to the laws of the canal (Article 1 of the 1888 Suez Canal Convention), increased following the coup. For example, on 31 October 1952, a cargo of meat was confiscated; on 2 September 1953, 500 tons of asphalt and a number of Israel-assembled cars were detained; on 4 November 1953, two boats destined for Italy were removed; on 28 September 1954 a shipment of 93 tons of meat, 42 tons of plywood and 30 tons of hides was confiscated, and the crew thrown in jail. On 8 July 1955, a Dutch ship was detained en route to Haifa. Part of its cargo was confiscated. On 25 May 1956, a Greek ship en route to Eilat was detained in the Suez Canal with a cargo of 520 tons of cement. The crew was not allowed ashore for three months despite a severe shortage of water and the spread of illness.

Britain's desire to mend Anglo-Egyptian relations in the wake of the coup saw her strive for rapprochement throughout 1953 and 1954. Part of this process was the agreement, in 1953, to terminate British rule in Sudan by 1956 in return for Cairo's abandoning of its claim to suzerainty over the Nile Valley region. In October 1954, Britain and Egypt concluded an agreement on the phased evacuation of British troops from the Suez base, the terms of which agreed to withdrawal of all troops within 20 months, maintenance of the base to be continued, and for Britain to hold the right to return for seven years.[17]
Despite the establishment of such an agreement with the British, Nasser's position remained tenuous. The loss of Egypt's claim to Sudan, coupled with the continued presence of Britain at Suez for a further two years, led to domestic unrest including an assassination attempt against him in October 1954. The tenuous nature of Nasser's rule caused him to believe that neither his regime, nor Egypt's independence would be safe until Egypt had established itself as head of the Arab world.[citation needed] This would manifest itself in the challenging of British Middle Eastern interests throughout 1955.
Britain's close relationship with the two Hashemite kingdoms of Iraq and Jordan were of particular concern to Nasser. In particular, Iraq's increasingly amicable relations with Britain were a threat to Nasser's desire to see Egypt as head of the Arab world. The creation of the Baghdad Pact in 1955 seemed to confirm Nasser's fears that Britain was attempting to draw the Eastern Arab World into a bloc centred upon Iraq, and sympathetic to Britain.[18] Nasser's response was a series of challenges to British influence in the region that would culminate in the Suez Crisis.

Throughout 1955 and 1956 Nasser pursued a number of policies that would frustrate British aims throughout the Middle East, and result in increasing hostility between Britain and Egypt. Nasser "... played on the widespread suspicion that any Western defence pact was merely veiled colonialism and that Arab disunity and weakness‚Äîespecially in the struggle with Israel‚Äîwas a consequence of British machinations."[19] He also began to align Egypt with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia‚Äîwhose rulers were hereditary enemies of the Hashemites‚Äîin an effort to frustrate British efforts to draw Syria, Jordan and Lebanon into the orbit of the Baghdad Pact. Nasser frustrated British attempts to draw Jordan into the pact by sponsoring demonstrations in Amman, leading King Hussein to dismiss the British commander of the Arab Legion Glubb Pasha in March 1956 and throwing Britain's Middle Eastern security policy into chaos.[20]
Nasser struck a further blow against Britain by negotiating an arms deal with communist Czechoslovakia in September 1955[21] thereby ending Egypt's reliance on Western arms. Under the terms of this deal, Czechoslovakia sold Egypt 200 tanks, 150 artillery pieces, 120 MiG jet fighters, 50 jet bombers, 20 transport planes, 15 helicopters, and hundreds of vehicles and thousands of modern rifles and machine guns. Although the arms were to be delivered promptly, Egypt paid for them over the span of 12 years with shipments of cotton to Czechoslovakia. This volume of arms was unlike any the Middle East had ever seen, and it was coupled with the sale of 100 tanks, 100 MiG fighters and hundreds of other items to Syria, as well as the provision of Czechoslovakian trainers and assistance personnel. Bulgaria later sold four destroyers, two submarines, and one frigate to Egypt, and two submarines and a missile boat to Syria, as well as minesweepers to both nations. In practice, all sales from the Eastern Bloc were authorized by the Soviet Union, and an attempt to increase Soviet influence over the Middle East.
This caused tensions in the United States because Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria now had a strong presence in the region. Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria were joined by the other members of the Warsaw Pact in selling arms to Egypt and Syria. Increasingly Nasser came to be viewed in British circles ‚Äî and in particular by Prime Minister Anthony Eden ‚Äî as a dictator, akin to Benito Mussolini. Anglo-Egyptian relations would continue on their downward spiral.

Britain was eager to tame Nasser and looked towards the United States for support. However, President Eisenhower remained unresponsive; America's closest ally in the region, Saudi Arabia, was just as fundamentally opposed to the Hashemite-dominated Baghdad Pact as Egypt, and the U.S. was keen to increase its own influence in the region. The failure of the Baghdad Pact aided such a goal by reducing Britain's dominance over the region. "Great Britain would have preferred to overthrow Nasser; America, however uncomfortable with the Czech arms deal, thought it wiser to propitiate him."[22]
The events that brought the crisis to a head, occurred in the spring/summer of 1956. On 16 May, Nasser officially recognized the People's Republic of China, a move that angered the U.S. and its Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, a keen sponsor of Taiwa
