Mac OS X v10.4
Mac OS X version 10.4 ‚ÄúTiger‚Äù was the fifth major release of Mac OS X, Apple‚Äôs desktop and server operating system for Macintosh computers. Tiger was released to the public on 29 April 2005 for US$129.95 as the successor to Mac OS X v10.3 ‚ÄúPanther‚Äù, which was released 18 months earlier. Tiger was superseded by Mac OS X v10.5 ‚ÄúLeopard‚Äù on 26 October 2007, after 30 months, making Mac OS X v10.4 the longest running version of Mac OS X.[1] Some of the new features include a fast searching system called Spotlight, a new version of the Safari web browser, Dashboard, a new ‚ÄòUnified‚Äô theme, and improved support for 64-bit addressing on Power Mac G5s.
Mac OS X v10.4 ‚ÄúTiger‚Äù was included with all new Macintosh computers, and was also available as an upgrade for existing Mac OS X users, or users of supported pre-Mac OS X systems. The server edition, Mac OS X Server 10.4, was also available for some Macintosh product lines. Tiger is also the first version of any released Apple operating system to work on Apple-Intel architecture machines (Apple machines using x86 processors). The Apple TV, as released in March 2007, ships with a customized version of Mac OS X v10.4 branded "Apple TV OS" that replaces the usual graphical user interface with an updated version of Front Row.[2]
Six weeks after its official release, Apple had delivered 2 million copies of Tiger, representing 16‚Äâ% of all Mac OS X users. Apple claimed that Tiger was the most successful Apple OS release in the company‚Äôs history.[3] At the World Wide Developers Conference on June 11, 2007, Apple CEO Steve Jobs announced that out of the 22 million Mac OS X users, more than 67‚Äâ% were using Tiger.[4] Tiger was supported until November 2007 because of the release of Mac OS X Leopard 10.5 [5], after which only security-related updates to Tiger were produced.

Mac OS X v10.4 was initially available in a PowerPC edition, with an Intel edition released beginning at 10.4.6; there is no universal version of the client operating system, although Tiger Server was made available on a universal DVD from version 10.4.7. While Apple shipped the PowerPC edition bundled with PowerPC-based Macs and also sold it as a separate retail box, the only way to get the Intel version was bundled with an Intel-based Mac. However, there were still unofficial places to buy the Intel version such as eBay, although the only Intel discs produced were the gray-colored "restore" DVDs supplied with new Macs that will only install on the model of Mac that they are intended for, unlike the retail DVD that can be used on any Mac supported by Tiger.
The system requirements of the PowerPC edition are:[6]
Tiger removed support for older New World ROM Macs such as the original iMacs and iBooks that were supported in Panther; however it is possible to install Tiger on these Macs using third-party software (such as XPostFacto) that overrides the checks made at the beginning of the installation process. Likewise, machines such as beige Power Mac G3s and ‚ÄúWall Street‚Äù PowerBook G3s that were dropped by Panther (the preceding release of Mac OS X) can also be made to run both Panther and Tiger in this way. Also Tiger can be installed on unsupported Macs by installing it on a supported Mac, then swapping hard drives.

Mac OS X v10.4 ‚ÄúTiger‚Äù was originally previewed by Apple CEO Steve Jobs in his keynote speech at the Worldwide Developers Conference on 28 June 2004. Later in December 2004, several non-commercial developer releases of Tiger were leaked onto the Internet. As a result, Apple sued the file sharers who were distributing Tiger for free by using BitTorrent.[7] On 12 April 2005, it was announced that Tiger would be officially released worldwide on 29 April. All Apple Stores around the world held Tiger seminars, presentations and demos.
On 6 June 2005 at the Worldwide Developers Conference in San Francisco, Jobs announced that almost two million copies had been sold in the six weeks since Tiger‚Äôs release, making it the most successful operating system release in Apple‚Äôs history. It was also revealed that Mac OS X had been engineered from its inception to work with Intel‚Äôs x86 line of processors in addition to the PowerPC, the CPU for which the operating system had always been publicly marketed. In June 2005, Apple announced plans to release the first x86-based computers in June 2006, transitioning the rest of their computers to x86 by June 2007. On 10 January 2006, Apple released their first iMac and MacBook Pro featuring an Intel Core Duo processor, and announced that the entire Apple product line would be transitioned to Intel processors by the end of 2006. Apple then released the Mac Pro and announced the new Xserve on 8 August 2006, completing the Intel transition in 210 days, rather than the full year that they had planned, and roughly ten months ahead of the original schedule.
Tiger is the first version of Mac OS X to be supplied on a DVD rather than on CDs, although the DVD could originally be exchanged for CDs for $9.95. It is also the first version of Mac OS to have an update version number ending with a value greater than 9, with the 10.4.10 and 10.4.11 updates.


Apple advertises that Mac OS X v10.4 Tiger has 200+ features, including:




In every major new revision of Mac OS X, Apple alters the graphical user interface somewhat. In Tiger the menu bar displayed at the top of the screen now features a colored Spotlight button in the upper right corner; the menu itself has a smoother 'glassy' texture to replace the faint pinstripes in 10.3.
Also of note, 10.4 introduces a new window theme, often described as ‚ÄòUnified‚Äô. A variation on the standard, non-brushed metal theme used since the introduction of Mac OS X, this theme integrates the title bar and the toolbar of a window. A prominent example of an application that utilizes this theme is Mail.

Shortly before the release of Mac OS X x10.4, the computer retailer TigerDirect.com, Inc. filed a lawsuit against Apple, alleging that Apple infringed TigerDirect.com‚Äôs trademark with the Mac OS X Tiger operating system.[12]
The following is a quotation from TigerDirect.com‚Äôs court memorandum:
The judge in the case ruled in Apple‚Äôs favor.[14]

Architecture
Universal binary
Boot Camp
Rosetta
†This box: view†‚Ä¢†talk†‚Ä¢†edit†
At the 2005 Worldwide Developers Conference, Apple CEO Steve Jobs announced that Apple would begin selling Mac computers with Intel processors in 2006. To allow developers to begin producing software for these Intel-based Macs, Apple made Developer Transition Kits available for sale which included a version of Mac OS X v10.4.1 designed to run on x86 processors.
This build includes Apple‚Äôs Rosetta‚Äîa translation process that allows Intel processor versions of the OS to run PPC software with little penalty. This is contrasted with the current Mac OS 9 Classic mode, which uses comparably larger amounts of system resources.
Soon after the Developer Transition Kits began shipping, copies of Tiger x86 leaked onto file sharing networks. Although Apple had implemented a Trusted Computing DRM scheme in the transition hardware and OS in an attempt to stop people installing Tiger x86 on non-Apple PCs,OSx86 project had soon managed to remove this restriction.[15] As Apple released each update with newer safeguards to prevent its use on non-Apple hardware, hacked versions were released that circumvented Apple‚Äôs safeguards. However, with the release of 10.4.5, 10.4.6, and 10.4.7 the hacked versions continued to use the kernel from the 10.4.4 because later kernels have hardware locks and depend heavily on Extensible Firmware Interface. By late 2006, the 10.4.8 kernel was cracked.[16]
At MacWorld San Francisco 2006, Jobs announced the immediate availability of Mac OS X v10.4.4, the first publicly available release of Mac OS X Tiger compiled for both PowerPC and Intel x86 based machines.

