A State of Trance
A State Of Trance (often abbreviated as ASOT) is the title of a weekly radio show hosted by popular trance DJ Armin van Buuren. First airing in March 2001 on ID&T Radio (the predecessor of Slam!FM), the show takes the format of a two hour mix in which he plays new trance music, both promotional and commercially released. Selected tracks are announced during the show in order to help promote new artists and releases. Its radio-show/website combination has proven popular internationally, as fans — while listening to the radio-show — will converse in the website chat-rooms and forums, such as DI.FM, during the broadcast. Internationally, the show attracts more than 30 million listeners each week[1],making it the most popular radio programme in the world.

When ID&T Radio changed genres at the end of January 2005, A State Of Trance was removed from their line-up. The show is currently broadcast on the following radio stations[2]:

DI.FM hosts each weekly A State Of Trance show for their On Demand service. The show is streamed in multiple formats: 192 kbit/s (MP3), 128 kbit/s (AAC), 128 kbit/s and 64 kbit/s (Windows Media), 64 kbit/s and 32 kbit/s (AAC+) for users with the paid Premium package, and free at 96 kbit/s (MP3), 24 kbit/s (AAC+), 40 kbit/s (Windows Media).

Occasional episodes feature guest DJs and/or live broadcasts. These were known as 'XXL' episodes, due to their longer than usual length.





Playlists for every episode can be found at the Playlist Section of Armin's website.

Each broadcast features three songs selected as Tune of the Week, Future Favourite and ASOT Radio Classic.

The Tune of the Week is selected by Armin van Buuren as his personal choice of best new tune in the show.

The Future Favourite is voted for by listeners from a list of new tunes from the previous week's show. The poll takes place at Trance.nu. This is equivalent to the "Web Vote Winner" feature of Above & Beyond's Trance Around the World radio show.

The ASOT Radio Classic track has been part of the show since episode 284. Armin selects a track from past years of trance and briefly describes what made the track a classic. It is played as the last track of the show.

Armin van Buuren also regularly releases double mix CD "A State of Trance" compilations, as listed below:


