Methamphetamine
C(US)
Controlled (S8)(AU) Schedule I(CA) Schedule II(US) Class A(NZ)
Schedule 5(SA)
Injectable:Class A, Oral: A(UK)
Methamphetamine (/mɛθæmfɛtəmiːn/, also known as methylamphetamine, N-methylamphetamine or desoxyephedrine) is a powerful psychostimulant and sympathomimetic drug. It is a member of the family of phenylethylamines. The levorotary (R-isomer) levomethamphetamine is an over-the-counter drug and used in inhalers for nasal decongestion and does not possess the CNS activity of dextro or racemic methamphetamine. The dextrorotatory (S-isomer) dextromethamphetamine can be prescribed to treat attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, though unmethylated amphetamine is more commonly prescribed. Narcolepsy and obesity can also be treated by the aforementioned isomer under the brand name Desoxyn. It is considered a second line of treatment, used when amphetamine and methylphenidate cause the patient too many side effects. It is only recommended for short-term use (~6 weeks) in treatment-resistant obesity patients because it is thought that the anorectic effects of the drug are short-lived and produce tolerance quickly, whereas the effects on CNS stimulation are much less susceptible to tolerance. It is primarily used illegally for recreational purposes, weight loss and to maintain alertness, focus, motivation, with mental clarity for extended periods of time.
Methamphetamine enters the brain and triggers a cascading release of norepinephrine, dopamine and serotonin. It is highly active in the mesolimbic reward pathway of the brain, inducing intense euphoria, with high-risk for abuse and powerful addiction. To a lesser extent, methamphetamine acts as a dopaminergic and adrenergic reuptake inhibitor with high concentrations serving as a monoamine oxidase inhibitor. Users may become hypersexual or obsessed with a task, thought or activity. Withdrawal is characterized by excessive sleeping, eating, and major depression, often accompanied by anxiety and drug-craving.[2] Users of methamphetamine often take sedatives such as benzodiazepines as a means of easing their "come down" and enable them to sleep.
Methamphetamine addiction typically occurs when a person begins to use it because of its powerful enhancing effects on mood and energy, weight loss and appetite suppression, among its other psychological and physical effects. Over time effectiveness decreases, and users find that they need to take higher doses to get the same results and have far greater difficulty functioning and experiencing pleasure without the drug than they did before. Many users report becoming an addict from their first "shot", or just one intravenous injection of crystal methamphetamine, marking its high affinity for a spiral of debilitating addiction and labelling as a "hard drug".
Common nicknames for methamphetamine include "crank", "meth", "ice", "crystal", "tina", "glass", "shabu" or "syabu" (Philippines), "tik" (South Africa), "P" (New Zealand), and "yaa baa" (Thailand). Methamphetamine is sometimes referred to as "speed", but this term is generally reserved for regular amphetamine and dextroamphetamine.[3]

Methamphetamine was first synthesized from ephedrine in Japan in 1894 by chemist Nagayoshi Nagai.[4] In 1919, crystallized methamphetamine was synthesized by Akira Ogata via reduction of ephedrine using red phosphorus and iodine.

One of the earliest uses of methamphetamine was during World War II when the German military dispensed it under the trade name Pervitin.[5] It was widely distributed across rank and division, from elite forces to tank crews and aircraft personnel. Chocolates dosed with methamphetamine were known as Fliegerschokolade ("flyer's chocolate") when given to pilots, or Panzerschokolade ("tanker's chocolate") when given to tank crews. From 1942 until his death in 1945, Adolf Hitler may have been given intravenous injections of methamphetamine by his personal physician Theodor Morell as a treatment for depression and fatigue. It is possible that it was used to treat Hitler's speculated Parkinson's disease, or that his Parkinson-like symptoms which developed from 1940 onwards resulted from using methamphetamine.[6]

After World War II, a large supply of amphetamine stockpiled by the Japanese military became available in Japan under the street name shabu (also Philopon, pronounced ヒロポン, or Hiropon, a tradename)[7]. The Japanese Ministry of Health banned it in 1951; since then it has been increasingly produced by the yakuza criminal organization.[8] Today methamphetamine is still associated with the Japanese underworld, and its use is discouraged by strong social taboos.
In the 1950s there was a rise in the legal prescription of methamphetamine to the American public. According to the 1951 edition of Pharmacology and Therapeutics by Arthur Grollman, it was to be prescribed for "narcolepsy, post-encephalitic Parkinsonism, alcoholism, ... in certain depressive states... and in the treatment of obesity."
The 1960s saw the start of significant use of clandestinely manufactured methamphetamine as well as methamphetamine created in users' own homes for personal use. The recreational use of methamphetamine peaked in the 1980s. The December 2, 1989 edition of The Economist described San Diego, California as the "methamphetamine capital of North America."
In 2000, The Economist again described San Diego, California as the methamphetamine capital of North America, and South Gate, California as the second capital city.

In 1983 laws were passed in the United States prohibiting possession of precursors and equipment for methamphetamine production; this was followed a month later by a bill passed in Canada enacting similar laws. In 1986 the U.S. government passed the Federal Controlled Substance Analogue Enforcement Act in an attempt to curb the growing use of designer drugs. Despite this, use of methamphetamine expanded throughout rural United States, especially through the Midwest and South.
Since 1989 five U.S. federal laws and dozens of state laws have been imposed in an attempt to curb the production of methamphetamine. Methamphetamine can be produced in home laboratories using pseudoephedrine or ephedrine, the active ingredients in over-the-counter drugs such as Sudafed and Contac. Preventative legal strategies of the past 17 years have steadily increased restrictions to the distribution of pseudoephedrine/ephedrine-containing products.
As a result of the U.S. Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005, a subsection of the PATRIOT Act, there are restrictions on the amount of pseudoephedrine and ephedrine one may purchase in a specified time period, and further requirements that these products must be stored in order to prevent theft.[9]

Methamphetamine is a potent central nervous system stimulant which affects neurochemical mechanisms responsible for regulating heart rate, body temperature, blood pressure, appetite, attention, mood and responses associated with alertness or alarm conditions. The acute physical effects of the drug closely resemble the physiological and psychological effects of an epinephrine-provoked fight-or-flight response, including increased heart rate and blood pressure, vasoconstriction (constriction of the arterial walls), bronchodilation, and hyperglycemia (increased blood sugar). Users experience an increase in focus, increased mental alertness, and the elimination of fatigue, as well as a decrease in appetite.
The methyl group is responsible for the potentiation of effects as compared to the related compound amphetamine, rendering the substance on the one hand more lipid soluble and easing transport across the blood brain barrier, and on the other hand more stable against enzymatic degradation by MAO. Methamphetamine causes the norepinephrine, dopamine and serotonin (5HT) transporters to reverse their direction of flow. This inversion leads to a release of these transmitters from the vesicles to the cytoplasm and from the cytoplasm to the synapse (releasing monoamines in rats with ratios of about NE:DA = 1:2, NE:5HT= 1:60), causing increased stimulation of post-synaptic receptors. Methamphetamine also indirectly prevents the reuptake of these neurotransmitters, causing them to remain in the synaptic cleft for a prolonged period (inhibiting monoamine reuptake in rats with ratios of about: NE:DA = 1:2.35, NE:5HT = 1:44.5[10]).
Methamphetamine is a potent neurotoxin, shown to cause dopaminergic degeneration.[11][12] High doses of methamphetamine produce losses in several markers of brain dopamine and serotonin neurons. Dopamine and serotonin concentrations, dopamine and 5HT uptake sites, and tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylase activities are reduced after the administration of methamphetamine. It has been proposed that dopamine plays a role in methamphetamine induced neurotoxicity because experiments which reduce dopamine production or block the release of dopamine decrease the toxic effects of methamphetamine administration. When dopamine breaks down it produces reactive oxygen species such as hydrogen peroxide. It is likely that the oxidative stress that occurs after taking methamphetamine mediates its neurotoxicity.[13] It has been demonstrated that a high ambient temperature increases the neurotoxic effects of methamphetamine.[14]
Recent research published in the Journal of Pharmacology And Experimental Therapeutics (2007),[15] indicates that methamphetamine binds to a group of receptors called TAAR. TAAR is a newly discovered receptor system which seems to be affected by a range of amphetamine-like substances called trace amines.


Physical effects can include a reduced appetite, anorexia, hyperactivity, dilated pupils, flushing, restlessness, dry mouth, headache, tachycardia, bradycardia, tachypnea, hypertension, hypotension, hyperthermia, diaphoresis, diarrhea, constipation, blurred vision, aphasia, dizziness, twitches, insomnia, numbness, palpitations, arrhythmias, tremors, dry and/or itchy skin, acne, pallor, and with chronic and/or high dosages, convulsions, heart attack, stroke and death can occur.[16][17][18][19]

Psychological effects can include euphoria, anxiety, increased libido, increased self-awareness, increased alertness, increased concentration, increased energy, increased self-esteem, increased self-confidence, increased excitation, increased orgasmic intensity, increased sociability, increased irritability, increased aggression, psychomotor agitation, hubris, excessive feelings of power and/or superiority, repetitive and/or obsessive behaviors, paranoia, and with chronic and/or high doses, amphetamine psychosis can occur.[20][17][19]

Withdrawal is characterized by excessive sleeping, eating, and major depression, often accompanied by anxiety and drug-craving.[20][21][22]

The half life of methamphetamine is 9–15 hours. It is excreted by the kidneys and its half life depends on urinary pH. One of the metabolites of methamphetamine is amphetamine.[1]

As with other amphetamines, tolerance to methamphetamine is not completely understood, but known to be sufficiently complex that it cannot be explained by any single mechanism. The extent of tolerance and the rate at which it develops varies widely between individuals, and even within one person it is highly dependent on dosage, duration of use and frequency of administration. Many cases of narcolepsy were treated with methamphetamine for years without escalating doses or any apparent loss of effect.
Short term tolerance can be caused by depleted levels of neurotransmitters within the vesicles available for release into the synaptic cleft following subsequent reuse (tachyphylaxis). Short term tolerance typically lasts until neurotransmitter levels are fully replenished, because of the toxic effects on dopaminergic neurons, this can be greater than 2–3 days. Prolonged overstimulation of dopamine receptors caused by methamphetamine may eventually cause the receptors to downregulate in order to compensate for increased levels of dopamine within the synaptic cleft.[23] To compensate, larger quantities of the drug are needed in order to achieve the same level of effects.

Methamphetamine is 
