Red vs. Blue
Red vs. Blue, often abbreviated as RvB, is a set of related machinima comic science fiction video series created by Rooster Teeth Productions and distributed primarily through the Internet and DVD. The story centers on two opposing teams of soldiers fighting a civil war in the middle of a desolate box canyon (Blood Gulch), in a parody of first-person shooter (FPS) games, military life, and science fiction films. Initially intended to be a short series of six to eight episodes, the project quickly and unexpectedly achieved significant popularity following its Internet premiere on April 1, 2003. Rooster Teeth therefore decided to continue the story. The fifth and final season of the original Red: vs. Blue: The Blood Gulch Chronicles series ended with episode 100, released on June 28, 2007. Three mini-series—Out of Mind, Recovery One, and Relocated—and the full-length Reconstruction series have extended the plot.
Red vs. Blue emerged from Burnie Burns' voice-over-enhanced gameplay videos of Bungie Studios' FPS video game Halo: Combat Evolved. The series is primarily produced using the machinima technique of synchronizing video footage from a game to pre-recorded dialogue and other audio. Footage is mostly from the multiplayer modes of Halo: Combat Evolved and its sequels, Halo 2 and Halo 3, on the Microsoft Xbox and Xbox 360 video game consoles.
Both within the machinima community and among film critics, Red vs. Blue has been generally well-received. Praised for its originality, the series has won four awards at film festivals held by the Academy of Machinima Arts & Sciences. It has been credited with bringing new popularity to machinima, helping it to gain more mainstream exposure, and attracting more people to the art form. Graham Leggat, former director of communications for Lincoln Center's film society, described Red vs. Blue as "truly as sophisticated as Samuel Beckett".[1] While special videos continue to be released online, the completed series is also available on DVD, making the series one of the first commercially released and successful machinima products. Rooster Teeth has created videos, some under commission from Microsoft, for special events, and Red vs. Blue content is included with the Legendary Edition of Halo 3.


Red vs. Blue centers on the Red and Blue Teams, two groups of soldiers engaged in a civil war. Originally, each team occupies a small base in a box canyon known as Blood Gulch. According to Simmons (Gustavo Sorola), one of the Red Team soldiers, each team's base exists only in response to the other team's base. Although both teams generally dislike each other and have standing orders to defeat their opponents and capture their flag, neither team is usually motivated to fight the other. Teammates have an array of eccentric personalities and often create more problems for each other than for their enemies.
The Red vs. Blue storyline spans six full-length seasons and three mini-series. Rooster Teeth periodically releases self-referential public service announcements (PSAs) and holiday-themed videos, which are generally unrelated to the main storyline. In these videos, however, the members of both teams claim to be from Red vs. Blue.
Although the visual background of Red vs. Blue is primarily taken from the Halo series, Rooster Teeth consciously limits connections to the Halo fictional universe. A special video made for E3 2003 portrays Master Chief, the protagonist of the Halo series, as a larger-than-life member of the army, and the Red vs. Blue trailer and first episode establish that the series is set between the events of the two games. Beyond these references, the storyline is independent, a decision that, according to Burns, is intended to increase accessibility to those unfamiliar with the games. For example, even though the season 4 and season 5 casts include characters from the alien Covenant Elite race, Rooster Teeth never portrays those characters in their original Halo context.[2]

Initially, the Red Team consists of Grif (Geoff Ramsey); Simmons; their leader, Sarge (Matt Hullum); and a robot, Lopez (Burnie Burns). The Blue Team consists of Tucker (Jason Saldaña) and the self-appointed leader, Church (Burnie Burns). Intra-team bickering is interrupted by the addition of new characters: Donut (Dan Godwin) to the Red Team, Caboose (Joel Heyman) and an artificially intelligent (AI) tank named Sheila (Yomary Cruz) to the Blue Team. Sent on a fool's errand, Donut manages to capture the Blue Team's flag; shortly after, Caboose and Sheila accidentally kill Church. In response, Blue Command sends a mercenary named Tex (Kathleen Zuelch), who recovers the flag, but is captured shortly after. Although an apparition of Church returns to warn his team that Tex, his former girlfriend, is partially controlled by a psychotic AI, he rescues her. He plans to remove her AI, but, before he can, Donut mortally wounds her. Just before she dies, she informs Church that the AI is gone; meanwhile, Caboose ominously insists that his real name is O'Malley.[3] DuFresne (Matt Hullum), a medic soon nicknamed "Doc", arrives three months later, intending to help both armies because of a lack of resources. However, both teams become annoyed and reject him. Tex returns as a ghost to confirm that her former AI, O'Malley (various),[4] now possesses Caboose. When she and Church enter Caboose's mind to evict O'Malley, the AI flees to control Doc. Later, the Blues capture Donut and force Sarge to build robot bodies for Church and Tex in exchange for his return. During a standoff, Tucker concludes that both teams are secretly controlled by the same Command; they have a common contact named Vic (Burnie Burns). O'Malley suddenly appears, kidnaps Lopez, and escapes through a teleporter. The Red and Blue Teams call a truce and join forces to pursue O'Malley.[3] However, the teleporter malfunctions,[5] and the teams become scattered among various locations outside Blood Gulch.[6]
The Red and Blue Teams regroup and confront O'Malley, but a bomb built into Church's robot body detonates and propels everyone, except Church, into the future; Church, however, is thrown into the past. In the future, the Reds and Blues battle O'Malley at his new fortress and meet a sentient, foul-mouthed time bomb named Andy (Nathan Zellner). In the past, Church waits one thousand years until Gary, a computer that he meets, can teleport him back to Blood Gulch. There, he attempts to rewrite history and prevent problems, but eventually realizes that his own actions cause these issues, and resigns to be blown into the future with everyone else. O'Malley soon lays siege to his captured fortress with an army of robots. Unknown to the Blues, the Reds leave mid-battle and arrive back at Blood Gulch. An unknown being destroys O'Malley's army and then confronts O'Malley himself.[7] As the Red Team re-explores Blood Gulch, the Blue Team learns that the creature, the Alien (Nathan Zellner), is on a sacred quest, which Tucker, Andy, and Caboose are forced to join. During the quest, Wyoming re-appears, however, kills the Alien, and flees.[8] With help from York (Sean Duggan) and his AI, Delta (Mark Bellman), Tex pursues Wyoming to discover O'Malley's current host, but Wyoming escapes through a teleporter built by Gary, his AI.[9] Meanwhile, Church returns to Blood Gulch and accidentally contacts Vic Jr. (Burnie Burns), a distant descendant of Vic who informs Church about past events. After the quest team returns to Blood Gulch, Tucker becomes ill; Church calls Doc, whom O'Malley still controls, for help. Doc diagnoses Tucker with male pregnancy; Andy explains that the Alien had impregnated Tucker,[8] who gives birth to an alien child, Junior (Jason Saldaña),[9] off-screen.[8] O'Malley leaves Doc after Sarge contacts Command for reinforcements, and a ship crashes into the gulch, on top of Donut,[8] who falls into an underground cave.[9]
Grif's sibling, Sister (Rebecca Frasier), emerges from the ship; however, she reveals to Grif and Simmons that she is assigned to the Blue Team. Grif eventually lets her join her intended group. The Reds discover Donut alive in the cavern, and find an underground computer spying on Blood Gulch. Meanwhile, the Blues move Sheila's AI to the crashed ship and deal with Junior. Tex returns, and Vic contacts the Blues, urging them to attack Red Base via the caves; instead, they split up. In the caves, Doc, Junior, and Sister find Lopez, who had returned to the gulch with O'Malley. Meanwhile, Church, Tucker and Tex attack the Red Base, but are ambushed by Wyoming and Gary; the latter now occupies the Blues' tank. Tucker thwarts Wyoming's attack and kills him. It is revealed that Junior is the supposed ruler of the aliens, and that the villains intend to exploit the alien race through him. Realizing an opportunity to win the war by enslaving the aliens, Tex coaxes O'Malley into infecting her, and tries to flee on the ship with Wyoming's helmet and Junior. However, the Reds have placed Andy on board, and an explosion is seen. The survivors return to their bases and repeat dialogue from the first episodes, thus concluding The Blood Gulch Chronicles.[9][10]
After Agent Washington (Shannon McCormick), also known as "Recovery One", retrieves Delta,[11] he encounters twin freelancers, South Dakota and North Dakota. He is ordered to find North Dakota's AI (Theta) and to kill South Dakota. Instead, he spares South to enlist her help in defeating an unknown enemy targeting the remaining freelancers. Delta is implanted in South, who betrays Agent Washington and convinces her attacker to steal his enhancements. Washington's commander instructs South to return to base, but she refuses and leaves. Washington survives and finds Caboose and Church, while a mysterious entity, the Meta, manipulates communications to order the Reds to attack them. Washington, Caboose, and Church find the Meta attacking Agent South. The Meta escapes the battle, and Washington kills South. The group confronts the Meta again at a windmill facility, but are interrupted by the Reds. During the ensuing discussion between the teams, the Meta recovers, attacks, and escapes again. To help Caboose, rendered unconscious off-screen, Church enters his mind and finds a message left by Delta. Interpreting the message, Washington decides that they must visit Command. They are allowed entry, but the Meta sneaks inside with them. Inside, Washington and Church find Washington's former AI partner, Epsilon. Revealing the true nature of Project Freelancer and the AIs, Washington deems Church to be the remnants of the Alpha AI. Abruptly, the base alarm triggers, and Recovery agents attack the team. Washington orders the Reds and Caboose to escape with Epsilon while he and Church remain to detonate an electromagnetic pulse (EMP). Initially defiant, Church ultimately stays as a ghost-like apparition, while the others take his body. The Meta pursues and shoots Washington, demanding to see Alpha as promised. Church occupies the Meta long enough for Washington to activate the EMP. Caboose successfully escapes with Epsilon, but Church's fate is left unstated. The Reds are awarded temporary use of an outpost for their role. Narrating the epilogue, the Director of Project Freelancer reveals himself as the real Leonard Church, stating that the Alpha (Private Church) is based on his mind and memories.
After the Reds settle into the new base, Sarge attempts to improve his new Warthog and eventually calls Lopez for help, while Caboose works on a secret project at his own base. Donut arrives at Red base, collapsing from thirst before telling Grif that "he needs help... it's under the sand... find him!"

Red vs. Blue features characters whose personalities are skewed in different ways and to varying degrees. Character interaction and dialogue, rather than action, drive the story.[12] The series has centered on eight main characters, four per team. Other characters, both team-affiliated and unaffiliated, human and non-human, have played significant roles throughout the story.

Sarge is the staff sergeant[13] and leader of the Blood Gulch Red Team. A military man with a Southern United States accent, he is the only Blood Gulch soldier on either team consistently serious about the Red versus Blue civil war. His sociopathic battle plans often entail unnecessary casualties of his own men, especially Grif. Dexter Grif is habitually lazy and irresponsible. These characteristics earn him the disrespect and ridicule of both Sarge and Dick Simmons, Sarge's sycophantic, insecure, right-hand man. Despite this, Simmons, and Grif are often seen together, either chatting or bickering. Franklin Delano Donut is the eager rookie who joins the team in episode 3. He tends to annoy his teammates with his naïveté, garrulousness, and cheerfulness and becomes more effeminate and childish as the series progresses.
Leonard L. Church is the cynical de facto leader of the Blue Team, and is found to be what is left of the Alpha AI. Often shouldering the responsibility of actually solving the various crises that the Blood Gulch teams encounter, he often ends up taking their brunt, leaving him increasingly disillusioned and antisocial. His serious, reasoned approach conflicts with the personalities of Lavernius Tucker and Michael J. Caboose. The first is snide, averse to work and battle, and obsessed with women; the second, although physically strong, exhibits ever-increasing degrees of stupidity and childishness throughout the series, to a point of a virtual divorce from reality. Tex (Alison), Church's former girlfriend, is hired by Blue Command to join the team as a mercenary in episode 10. Able to eliminate entire teams of soldiers by herself, she is described as "the most lethal soldier in Blood Gulch".[14]


