Polish language
jƒôzyk polski, polszczyzna†
Minority language:[3]
†Czech Republic
†Slovakia
†Romania
†Ukraine
Polish (jƒôzyk polski, polszczyzna), an official language of Poland, has the largest number of speakers of any West Slavic language.[4] Polish-speakers use the language in a uniform manner through most of Poland, and it has a Latin-based orthography. The language developed indigenously and retains many ancient Slavic features of pronunciation and grammar. Although non-Polish administrations in Poland sometimes attempted, historically, to suppress the Polish language, a rich literature has nonetheless developed over the centuries, and many works by Polish authors are available in translations in English and other languages.

Nearly 97% of Poland's citizens declare Polish as their mother tongue. As a result of World War II Poland was forced to change its borders, which resulted in various migrations (World War II evacuation and expulsion, German expulsions, Operation Wis≈Ça) as well as in ethnic cleansing of the Poles across the current borders such as the Massacres of Poles in Volhynia. Nevertheless, after the Second World War the previously Polish territories annexed by the Soviet Union retained a significant proportion of the Polish population unwilling or unable to undergo forced migration toward the post-1945 Poland. Even today ethnic Poles constitute large minorities in Lithuania, Belarus, and among the Poles in Ukraine. Polish is by far the most widely used minority language in Lithuania's Vilnius County (26% of the population, according to the 2001 census results), and it is also present in other counties. In Ukraine, Polish is most often used in the Lviv and Lutsk regions. Western Belarus has an important Polish minority, especially in the Brest and Grodno regions.
Significant numbers of Polish speakers also inhabit: Argentina, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Faroe Islands, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Mexico, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Sweden, Peru, Romania, Russia, Serbia, Slovakia, Spain, Ukraine, UAE, the UK, Uruguay and the United States.
In the United States, Polish Americans number more than 11 million, but most of them cannot speak Polish fluently. According to the United States 2000 Census, 667,414 Americans of age 5 years and over reported Polish as the language spoken at home: about 1.4% of people who speak languages other than English, or 0.25% of the U.S. population. The largest concentrations of Polish speakers reported in the census (over 50%) occur in three states: Illinois (185,749), New York (111,740) and New Jersey (74,663).[5]
Canada has a significant Polish Canadian population. The 2006 census recorded 242,885 speakers of Polish, with a particular concentration in the city of Toronto, Ontario (91,810 speakers).[6]

The Polish language became far more homogeneous in the second half of the 20th century, in part due to the mass-migration of several million Polish citizens from the eastern to the western part of the country after the Soviet Union annexed the eastern Polish lands in 1939.
The inhabitants of different regions of Poland still[update] speak "Standard" Polish somewhat differently, although the differences between these broad "dialects" appear slight. First-language speakers of Polish never experience any difficulty in mutual understanding, and non-native speakers can generally not easily distinguish regional variations. The differences are slight compared to different dialects of English, for example.
The regional differences correspond mainly to old tribal divisions[citation needed] from around a thousand years ago; the most significant of these in terms of numbers of speakers relate to:
Some more characteristic but less widespread regional dialects include:

Polish has a relatively simple vowel-system, with only six oral and two nasal vowels. The Polish consonant system shows more complexity: its characteristic features include the series of affricates and palatal consonants that resulted from four Proto-Slavic palatalizations and two further palatalizations which took place in Polish and Belarusian. The stress falls generally on the penultimate (second to last) syllable.

The Polish alphabet derives from the Latin alphabet but uses diacritics, such as kreska (graphically similar to the acute accent), kropka (superior dot) and ogonek ("little tail"). Unlike other Latin-character Slavic languages (apart from Kashubian), Polish did not adopt a version of the Czech orthography, but developed one independently.
Note the laminal postalveolars [ Ç], [ ê], [tÕ° Ç], [dÕ° ê], perhaps most accurately transcribed using the IPA retracted diacritic as [sÃ†], [zÃ†], [tÕ° ÇÃ†], [dÕ° êÃ†] respective
