Phyllis Schlafly
Phyllis McAlpin Stewart Schlafly (b. August 15, 1924, in St. Louis, Missouri; pronounced /ˈfɪlɪs ˈʃlæfli/) is an American conservative political activist and constitutional attorney known for her opposition to feminism and the Equal Rights Amendment. Her bestselling book, A Choice, Not An Echo, was published in 1964 from her home in Alton, Illinois, across the Mississippi River from her native St. Louis. From this self-publication, she formed her Pere Marquette Publishers company. A Choice, Not an Echo decries the power of the "Eastern Establishment" in the Republican Party once exercised by New York Governors Thomas E. Dewey and Nelson A. Rockefeller. Schlafly supported U.S. Senator Barry M. Goldwater in his unsuccessful race against President Lyndon B. Johnson. She has co-authored several books on national defense and was highly critical of arms-control agreements with the former Soviet Union.[2]
Schlafly also maintains an active presence on the lecture circuit. In 1972, she founded the Eagle Forum, and was the founder and president of a sister organization known as the Eagle Forum Education & Legal Defense Fund, which also operates in the Eagle Forum's St. Louis office. As of 2008[update], she is still the president of both organizations. Since 1967, she has published her own political newsletter, the Phyllis Schlafly Report.

Schlafly's great-grandfather Stewart, a Presbyterian, came from Scotland to New York, in 1851, and moved westward through Canada before settling in Michigan.[3] Her grandfather, Andrew F. Stewart, was a successful master mechanic with the Chesapeake & Ohio Railway.[4] Schlafly's father, John Bruce Stewart, was a machinist and salesman of industrial equipment, principally for Westinghouse. He became unemployed in 1932 during the Great Depression and could not find permanent work until World War II.[5] He was granted a patent in 1944 for a rotary engine.[6]
Schlafly's mother, Odile Dodge, was the daughter of the moderately successful attorney Ernest C. Dodge. Odile attended college through graduate school and, before her marriage, worked as a teacher at Hosmer Hall, a private school for girls in St. Louis.[7] With her father’s legal business suffering during the Great Depression and her husband out of work, Odile worked as a librarian and a school teacher to support both families.
John Fred Schlafly, Jr., came from a well-to-do St. Louis family. His grandfather, August, immigrated in 1854 from Switzerland as a child. Shortly after August’s arrival, his father died and the family resettled in Carlyle, Illinois. There August and two brothers worked as clerks in a local grocery store. In 1876, August’s older brother married Catharine Hubert, the daughter of a successful local businessman.[8] Shortly thereafter, the three brothers founded the firm of Schlafly Bros., which dealt in groceries, Queensware (dishes made by Wedgwood), hardware, and agricultural implements.[9] They later sold that business and concentrated on banking and other businesses that made them wealthy.[6]

Schlafly was christened Phyllis McAlpin Stewart and brought up as a Roman Catholic in St. Louis. According to one report, during the Depression, Schlafly's father went into long-term unemployment, and her mother entered the labor market. Mrs. Stewart was able to keep the family afloat and maintained Phyllis in a Catholic girls' school.[10] In one of her books, Strike From Space (1965), Schlafly notes that she was at one time, "a ballistics gunner and technician at the largest ammunition plant in the world."
She began college early and worked as a model for a time. She earned her A.B. Phi Beta Kappa from Washington University, in St. Louis, in 1944, at age 19. She received a Master of Arts degree, in Government, from Radcliffe College, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1945. In 1978, she earned a J.D. from Washington University Law School in St. Louis.[5]
In 1952, Schlafly ran unsuccessfully for Congress as a Republican in a Democratic district. It was another decade, however, before she came to national attention with A Choice, Not an Echo, millions of copies of which were distributed in support of Goldwater's 1964 presidential campaign. In it, Schlafly denounced the Rockefeller Republicans in the Northeast, accusing them of corruption and globalism. Critics called the book a conspiracy theory about "secret kingmakers" controlling the Republican Party.[11] Schlafly attended the 1960 Republican National Convention, and helped lead a revolt of moral conservatives against Richard Nixon's stance on a change to a civil rights plank.[12]
In 1967, Schlafly lost her bid for the presidency of the National Federation of Republican Women after a vigorous campaign against the more moderate candidate Gladys O'Donnell of California. Schlafly's own next-door neighbor in Alton, a housewife and active Republican, accused her at the time of being, "an exponent of an extreme right-wing philosophy — a propagandist who deals in emotion and personalities where it is not necessary to establish facts or prove charges."[citation needed] Outgoing NFRW president and future United States Treasurer Dorothy Elston of Delaware worked against Schlafly in the campaign.[13]
She joined the John Birch Society, but quit because she thought that the main Communist threats to the nation were external, rather than internal. In 1970, Schlafly again ran unsuccessfully for a House of Representatives seat in Illinois, losing to Democratic incumbent George E. Shipley.


Schlafly became the most visible and effective opponent of the Equal Rights Amendment during the 1970s as the organizer of the "Stop the ERA" movement, widely credited with stopping it from achieving ratification by its legislative deadline. "STOP" is also an acronym for "Stop Taking our Privileges", because Schlafly argues the amendment, if passed and ratified, would take away privileges enjoyed by American women, including "dependent wife" benefits under Social Security and exemption from Selective Service registration.[14]
By the time Schlafly began campaigning in 1972, the amendment had already been ratified by 30 of the necessary 38 states. However, Schlafly was successful in organizing a grassroots campaign to oppose further states' ratifications. Five more states ratified ERA after Schlafly launched her opposition campaign, though an additional five state legislatures voted to rescind their ratifications. The last state to ratify was Indiana, where then State Senator Wayne Townsend, a Democrat, cast the tie-breaking vote for ratification in January 1977. In opposing ERA, Schlafly argued that "the ERA would lead to women being drafted by the military and to public unisex bathrooms."[15] Her views were opposed by Pro-ERA groups, led by the National Organization for Women (NOW) and the ERAmerica coalition.[16] The amendment was narrowly defeated, despite having achieved ratification in 35 states.[5]
Supporters of Schlafly argue that some of her claims have been confirmed by later state court rulings.[17] Her arguments against the ERA included her opposition to including women in the military draft. In 1981, a highly publicized lawsuit attempted to end the all-male selective service system, claiming it encouraged gender discrimination. In the absence of the ERA, the Supreme Court held by a 6-3 margin that Congress could register only men for military service. (Rostker v. Goldberg, 453 U.S. 57, 1981). Another case often cited by Schlafly supporters is the Harris v. McRae decision of 1980, in which, by a 5-4 vote, the Supreme Court held that Congress could provide funding for childbirth but not for abortion (Harris v. McRae, 448 U.S. 297, 1980).
Critics of Schlafly have emphasized an apparent contradiction between her advocacy against the ERA and her role as a working professional. Feminist activist Gloria Steinem and author Pia de Solenni, among others, have noted what they consider irony in Schlafly's role as an advocate for the full-time mother and wife, while being herself a lawyer, editor of a monthly newsletter, regular speaker at anti-liberal rallies, and political activist.[18][19][20] In her review of Schlafly's Feminist Fantasies, de Solenni writes that "Schlafly's discussion reveals a paradox. She was able to have it all: family and career. And she did it by fighting those who said they were trying to get it all for her... Happiness resulted from being a wife and mother and working with her husband to reach their goals." Schlafly has also been accused of racism, due to her opposition of racial integration in the 1960s and for a contempt of Jewish people.[21]
On August 27, 1974, activist attorney Florynce Kennedy appeared on CBS radio in Miami to promote ratification of the stalled Equal Rights Amendment. During the conversation Kennedy denounced Schlafly as a "pigocrat. . . I just don't see why some people don't hit Phyllis Schlafly in the mouth. I don't think she would be damaged seriously, but I don't think it would hurt if somebody slapped her. We're arguing with people like Schlafly who obviously aren't speaking from a rational perspective. Instead of so much argument, people should slap." Similarly, author Harlan Ellison, another ERA booster, said that if Schlafly walked into the headlights of his car, he would "knock her into the next time zone." Ellison proclaimed Schlafly a "mischievous woman who does terrible things."[22]
According to an article in the March 28, 2007 edition of the Washington Post, "New Drive Afoot to Pass Equal Rights Amendment," Schlafly is working towards the defeat of a new version of the Equal Rights Amendment: "Today, she warns lawmakers that its passage would compel courts to approve same-sex marriages and deny Social Security benefits for housewives and widows."[15]

Schlafly has been an outspoken critic of "activist judges," particularly on the Supreme Court. In 2005, Schlafly made headlines at a conference for the Judeo-Christian Council for Constitutional Restoration by suggesting that "Congress ought to talk about impeachment" of Justice Anthony Kennedy, citing as specific grounds Justice Kennedy's deciding vote to abolish the death penalty for minors. [23]
In late 2006, Schlafly collaborated with Jerome Corsi and Howard Phillips to create a website in opposition to the idea of a "North American Union", under which the United States, Mexico, and Canada would share a currency and be integrated in a structure similar to the European Union.[24]


As a college student in 1945, Schlafly applauded the establishment of the United Nations. Over the years, however, she has long repudiated the UN. On the 50th anniversary of the group in 1995, Schlafly referred to "a cause for mourning, not celebration. It is a monument to foolish hopes, embarrassing compromises, betrayal of our servicemen, and a steady stream of insults to our nation. It is a Trojan Horse that carries the enemy into our midst and lures Americans to ride under alien insignia to fight and die in faraway lands." Accordingly, she opposed U.S. President Bill Clinton's decision in 1996 to send 20,000 American troops to Bosnia. Schlafly noted that Balkan nations have fought one another for 500 years and that the U.S. military should not be "policemen" of world trouble spots.[25]
In 1961 she wrote that arms control "will not stop Red aggression any more than disarming our local police will stop murder, theft, and rape."[26]
Prior to the 1994 congressional elections, Schlafly condemned globalization through the World Trade Organization as a "direct attack on American sovereignty, independence, jobs, and economy . . . any country that must change its laws to obey rulings of a world organization has sacrificed its sovereignty."[27]

Schlafly continues to exert some influence within the Republican Party. She played a key role in writing some socially conservative language in the Republican National Convention's platform, most recently in 2004.
However, Schlafly has expressed dissatisfaction with the modern GOP. Though she has not been actively involved in the neoconservative/paleoconservative schism, her positions on many issues resemble those of a paleoconservative. Like Patrick J. Buchanan, whom she supported for the 1996 GOP nomination, she contends that President George W. Bush
However, despite such criticisms, the Eagle Forum defended the Party before the 2006 elections: "We cannot let our dissatisfaction and disappointment with some members of the Republican Party keep us from voting for the good guys — the ones who really are leaders for the conservative cause."[28]
Schlafly did not endorse a candidate for the 2008 Republican presidential nomination, but she has spoken out against Mike Huckabee, who she says as governor left the Republican Party in Arkansas "in shambles". She has hosted at the Eagle Forum U.S. Representative Tom Tancredo of Colorado, known for his opposition to illegal immigration. Before his election she criticised Barack Obama as "an elitist who worked with words" [29]

Schlafly told Time magazine in 1978, "I have canceled speeches whenever my husband thought that I had been away from home too much."[30] She also said, "By getting married, the woman has consented to sex, and I don't think you can call it rape."[31] On March 30, 2006, Schlafly provided an interview for The New York Times in which she attributed improvement in women's lives during the last decades of the 20th Century to labor-saving devices such as the indoor clothes dryer and paper diapers.[32]

She was married to attorney John Fred Schlafly, Jr., (1909–1993) for 44 years until his death. They had six children: John, Bruce, Roger, Liza, Andrew, and Anne.
In 1992, Schlafly's eldest son, John, was outed as gay by Queer Week magazine.[33][34] Schlafly has declined to comment on the matter in interviews. Her son Andrew has been noted for founding Conservapedia, a conservative open-source encyclopedia project that he founded over his concerns that Wikipedia had liberal bias.[35]

On May 1, 2008, the Board of Trustees of Washington University in St. Louis announced that Schlafly would be presented an honorary degree at the school's 2008 commencement ceremony. This was immediately met with objection by some students and faculty at the university who accused her of being anti-feminist and criticized her work on defeating the equal rights amendment.[36] Fourteen university law professors wrote in a complaint letter that Schlafly's career demonstrated "anti-intellectualism in pursuit of a political agenda."[37] While the Board of Trustees' honorary degree committee approved the honorees unanimously, five student members of the committee wrote to complain that they had to vote on the five honorees as a slate, in the final stage of the voting and feel the selection of Schlafly was a mistake.[38][39] Katha Pollitt of The Nation magazine criticized this decision because she considered Schlafly a "promoter of innumerable crackpot far-right conspiracy theories" and opponent of women's rights.[40]
In the days leading up to the commencement ceremony, Washington University Chancellor Mark S. Wrighton explained the university’s Board of Trustees' decision to award Schlafly’s degree with the following statement:
At the May 16, 2008, commencement ceremony, Schlafly was awarded a Doctor of Humane Letters degree. A protest to rescind Schlafly's honorary degree received support from faculty and students. During the ceremony, hundreds of the 14,000 attendees, including one-third the graduating students and some faculty, silently stood and turned their backs to Schlafly in protest.[42][38] In the days leading up to the commencement there were several protests regarding her degree award; Schlafly described these protesters as, "a bunch of losers."[43] In addition, she stated after the ceremony that the protesters were "juvenile" and that, "I
