Stuckism
Stuckism is an international art movement that was founded in 1999 in Britain by Billy Childish (who left in 2001) and Charles Thomson to promote figurative painting in opposition to conceptual art.[1] The Stuckists formed as an alternative to the Charles Saatchi-patronised Young British Artists (also known as Brit Art or YBAs). The original group of thirteen artists has since expanded, as of April 2009, to 193 groups in 45 countries.
They have staged many shows, but have gained more attention for outspoken media comments and demonstrations, particularly outside Tate Britain against the Turner Prize, sometimes dressed in clown costumes. After exhibiting mainly in small galleries in Shoreditch, London, they were given their first show in a major public museum in 2004, The Walker Art Gallery, as part of the Liverpool Biennial. Other campaigns mounted by the group include official avenues, such as standing in the 2001 general election, reporting Saatchi to the Office of Fair Trading to complain about his power in the art world (the complaint was not upheld), and applying under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 for Tate Gallery trustee minutes, which started a media scandal about the purchase of Chris Ofili's work, The Upper Room and led to an official rebuke of the Tate by the Charity Commission.
The group held disputes against the artist Stella Vine from 2004-2008.

The name Stuckism was coined by Thomson in response to a poem published by Billy Childish in 1994, which records an argument with Tracey Emin in which she accused Childish of being stuck. The poem reads:
Childish has said that this was in response to his declining to attend a talk with Emin.

Most of the members of the first thirteen-strong Stuckists group founded in 1999 had been in collaboration for up to two decades previously, and in 1979 had formed The Medway Poets, which included later Stuckists Bill Lewis and Sexton Ming. Other members of the first Stuckists group were Philip Absolon, Frances Castle, Sheila Clark, Eamon Everall, Ella Guru (now married to Sexton Ming), Wolf Howard, Sanchia Lewis (no relation to Bill Lewis), Joe Machine and Charles Williams.

The group are defined by their Stuckists manifesto, written by Childish and Thomson in 1999, that places great importance on the value of painting as a medium, as well as the use of it for communication and the expression of emotion and experience - as opposed to what they see as the superficial novelty, nihilism and irony of conceptual art and postmodernism.
The most contentious statement in their manifesto is: "Artists who don't paint aren't artists". In a second manifesto, the Stuckists declared that they aimed to replace postmodernism with Remodernism, a period of renewed spiritual (as opposed to religious) values in art, culture and society. Other manifestos include An Open Letter to Sir Nicholas Serota (which received a brief reply from him[2]: Thank you for your open letter dated 6 March. You will not be surprised to learn that I have no comment to make on your letter, or your manifesto 'Remodernism'.), The Turner Prize, The Decrepitude of the Critic, and Handy Hints.

In January 1999, the first Stuckists group was co-founded by Thomson and Childish with 10 other artists (Sanchia Lewis became the 13th member in September during the first show). Founding artist Ella Guru started the Stuckist web site. In July 1999, the Stuckists were first mentioned in the media, in an article in The Evening Standard and quickly gained other coverage, helped by press interest in Tracey Emin who had been nominated for the Turner Prize. They have continued to gain media coverage since.
The Stuckists have staged numerous exhibitions of their work, starting in September 1999 with Stuck! Stuck! Stuck! in Joe Crompton's Gallery 108 (now defunct) in Shoreditch, and The Resignation of Sir Nicholas Serota. In 2000 they gained attention by staging The Real Turner Prize Show at the same time as the Tate Gallery's official version.
Billy Childish formally left the group in 2001. He has said "I disagreed with the way Charles presented the group, particularly in the media." He has further distanced himself by stating "I never, ever, attended any Stuckist demonstrations, and my work was not shown in the large Stuckist exhibition held in the Walker Art Gallery in 2004."
Thomson stood as a Stuckist candidate for the 2001 British General Election, in the constituency of Islington South & Finsbury, against Chris Smith, the then Secretary of State for Culture. He picked up 108 votes (0.4%).
From 2002 to 2005 Thomson ran the Stuckism International Centre and Gallery in Shoreditch, London. In 2003, under the title A Dead Shark Isn't Art, the gallery exhibited a shark which had first been put on public display in 1989 (two years before Damien Hirst's) by Eddie Saunders in his Shoreditch shop, JD Electrical Supplies. It was suggested Hirst may have seen this at the time and copied it, but that anyway Saunders was the real pioneering artist.[3]
In 2003 they reported Charles Saatchi to the UK Office of Fair Trading, complaining that he had an effective monopoly on art. The complaint was not upheld.[4] In 2003, an allied group Stuckism Photography was founded by Larry Dunstan and Andy Bullock. In 2005 the Stuckists offered a donation of 175 paintings from the Walker show to the Tate. This was rejected by the Tate Board of Trustees.
In August 2005 the Stuckists initiated a major controversy over the Tate's purchase of its trustee Chris Ofili's work The Upper Room for £705,000.[5] In July 2006 the Charity Commission completed an investigation into The Tate's purchase of trustees' work, censuring the gallery for acting outside its legal powers.[6] Sir Nicholas Serota stated that the Stuckists had "acted in the public interest".[7] In October 2006, the Stuckists staged their first exhibition, Go West, in a commercial West End gallery, Spectrum London. This "major exhibition"[8] signalled their entry as "major players" in the art world.[9]
An international symposium on Stuckism took place in October 2006 at the Liverpool John Moores University during the Liverpool Biennial. The programme was led by Naive John, founder of the Liverpool Stuckists. There was an accompanying exhibition in the 68 Hope Gallery at Liverpool School of Art and Design (John Moores University Gallery).

The Stuckists gained significant media coverage for eight years of protests (2000-2006 and 2008) outside Tate Britain against the Turner Prize, sometimes dressed as clowns. In 2001 they demonstrated in Trafalgar Square at the unveiling of Rachel Whiteread's Monument. In 2002, they carried a coffin marked The Death of Conceptual Art to the White Cube Gallery.[10][11] In 2004 outside the launch of The Triumph of Painting at the Saatchi Gallery they wore tall hats with Charles Saatchi's face on and carried placards claiming that Saatchi had copied their ideas. In 2005 they protested outside the Turner Prize against the purchase of Ofili's The Upper Room.
Events outside Britain have included The Clown Trial of President Bush held in New Haven in 2003 to protest against the Iraq War. Michael Dickinson has exhibited political and satirical collages in Turkey for which he was arrested,[12] and charged, but acquitted of any crime—an outcome which was seen to have positive implications for Turkey's relationship with the European Union.[13]

The Stuckists Punk Victorian was the first national gallery exhibition of Stuckist art. It was held at the Walker Art Gallery and Lady Lever Art Gallery and was part of the 2004 Liverpool Biennial. It consisted of over 250 paintings by 37 artists, mostly from the UK but also with a representation of international Stuckist artists from the US, Germany and Australia. There was an accompanying exhibition of Stuckist photographers. A book, The Stuckists Punk Victorian, was published to accompany the exhibition. The cover showed Paul Harvey's painting of Emily Mann.
Daily Mail journalist, Jane Kelly, exhibited a painting of Myra Hindley in the show, and was dismissed from her job.[14]

In 2005, Fraser Kee Scott, Director of A Gallery, demonstrated with the Stuckists art group outside the Tate gallery against the gallery's purchase of The Upper Room, a work by Chris Ofili, then a serving Tate trustee.
In October 2005, Scott, described as "gallery owner—and Stuckist", said in The Daily Telegraph that Tate gallery chairman, Paul Myners, was hypocritical for refusing to divulge the price paid by the Tate for its purchase of The Upper Room, paintings by its trustee, Chris Ofili, who had asked other artists to donate work to the gallery.[15]
In April 2007, some Stuckist artists were included in a group show at the A Gallery, Wimbledon, London. The gallery owner, Fraser Kee Scott, a member of the Church of Scientology, talked about the Church and the show in an interview in the 'South London Guardian'.[16] Thomson told the Evening Standard that it was "outrageous" that the Stuckists should be linked to Scientology, as the artists had no connection with it.[17] Thomson later said he accepted that it was not Scott's intention to link the show and the Church, and he considered that the matter was a misunderstanding that had been resolved.[18]
In July 2007, the Stuckists held an exhibition at the A Gallery, I Won't Have Sex with You as long as We're Married,[19][20] titled after words apparently said to Thomson by his ex-wife, Stella Vine on their wedding night.[20] The show coincided with the opening of Vine's major show at Modern Art Oxford and was prompted by Thomson's anger that the material promoting her show omitted any mention of her time with the Stuckists, which he said had been influential on her work.[19] Tate chairman Paul Myners visited both shows.[21]

Thomson's painting, Sir Nicholas Serota Makes an Acquisitions Decision, is one of the best known paintings to come out of the Stuckist movement,[11] and a likely "signature piece" for the movement,[22] standing for its opposition to conceptual art. It was painted in 2000 and has been exhibited in Stuckist shows since, as well as being featured on placards during Stuckist demonstrations against the Turner Prize.
It depicts Sir Nicholas Serota, Director of the Tate Gallery and the usual chairman of the Turner Prize jury, and satirises Young British Artist Tracey Emin's installation, My Bed, consisting of her bed and objects, including knickers, which she exhibited in 1999 as a Turner Prize nominee.[23]

The Stuckists have grown to an international movement and as of November 2008 numbered 183 (affiliated but independent) groups in 44 countries.[24]

In October 2000, Regan Tamanui founded the Melbourne Stuckists,[25] the fourth Stuckist group to be started and the first one outside the UK. On October 27, 2000, he staged the Real Turner Prize Show at the Dead End Gallery in his home, concurrent with three shows with the same title in England (London, Falmouth and Dartington), and one in Germany, in protest against the Tate Gallery's Turner Prize. Other Australian Stuckists include Godfrey Blow, who exhibited in The Stuckists Punk Victorian.[26]

in 2000, Susan Constance founded the first US group The Pittsburgh Stuckists—the second group to be founded outside the UK. This was announced in the In Pittsburgh Weekly, 1 November 2000: "The new word in art is Stuckism. A Stuckist paints their life, mind and soul with no pretensions and no excuses."[27] By 2006 there were 21 US Stuckist groups. There have been Stuckist shows and demonstrations in the US, and American Stuckists have also exhibited in international Stuckist shows abroad. US Stuckists include Jeffrey Scott Holland, Tony Juliano, Frank Kozik, Terry Marks and Jesse Richards.

The mainstay of the Stuckists has been in the UK, where by 2006 there were 63 groups. Artists include Elsa Dax, Paul Harvey, Naive John, Jane Kelly, Emily Mann, 
