V for Vendetta
V for Vendetta is a ten-issue comic-book series written by Alan Moore and illustrated mostly by David Lloyd, set in a dystopian future United Kingdom imagined from the 1980s about the 1990s. A mysterious anarchist named "V" works to destroy the totalitarian government, profoundly affecting the people he encounters.
The series depicts a near-future Britain after a limited nuclear war, which has left much of the world destroyed. In this future, a fascist party called Norsefire has arisen as the ruling power. "V", an anarchist revolutionary dressed in a Guy Fawkes mask, begins an elaborate, violent and theatrical campaign to bring down the government. A film version premiered in 2005.

The first episodes of V for Vendetta originally came out in black-and-white between 1982 and 1985, in Warrior, a British anthology comic published by Quality Comics. The strip became one of the most popular in the title and featured on several covers during the 26 issues of Warrior.
Internally, V for Vendetta sub-divides into three "books". Warrior collapsed two chapters before the end of the second book. Three years later, DC Comics reunited Alan Moore and David Lloyd to finish the series, which appeared in ten monthly issues, then in collected form in hardback and trade paperback. David Lloyd's artwork for V for Vendetta in Warrior originally appeared in black-and-white, giving it a harsh chiaroscuro effect that worked very well with the grim subject matter. The DC Comics version published the artwork "colourised" in pastels, which some fans feel compromises its effectiveness. Lloyd, however, has stated that he had always intended the artwork to appear in colour, and it was initially published in black and white for financial reasons because colour would have been too expensive.
In writing V for Vendetta, Moore drew upon an idea for a strip titled The Doll he had submitted at the age of 22 to DC Thomson. In "Behind the Painted Smile",[1] Moore revealed that the idea was rejected as DC Thomson balked at the idea of a "transsexual terrorist". Years later, Warrior editor Dez Skinn invited Moore to create a dark mystery strip with artist David Lloyd.[2] Lloyd and Moore considered several proposals, including one titled Vendetta that set the story in 1930s United States. The setting developed through their discussions, moving from 1930s United States to near-future Britain. As the setting progressed, so did the character's development; once conceived as a "realistic" gangster-age American, he became, first, a policeman rebelling against the totalitarian state he served, then became a heroic anarchist.
Moore and Lloyd conceived the series as a dark adventure strip influenced by British comic characters of the 1960s, as well as Night Raven, a Marvel UK strip which Lloyd had previously worked on with writer Steve Parkhouse. Editors Dez Skinn and Graham Marsh came up with the name V for Vendetta. David Lloyd developed the idea of dressing V as Guy Fawkes after previous designs followed the conventional superhero look.
During the preparation of the story Moore made a list of what he wanted to bring into the plot, which he reproduced in "Behind the Painted Smile":
"Orwell. Huxley. Thomas Disch. Judge Dredd. Harlan Ellison's "Repent, Harlequin!" Said the Ticktockman, Catman and The Prowler in the City at the Edge of the World by the same author. Vincent Price's Dr. Phibes and Theatre of Blood. David Bowie. The Shadow. Night Raven. Batman. Fahrenheit 451. The writings of the New Worlds school of science fiction. Max Ernst's painting "Europe After the Rain". Thomas Pynchon. The atmosphere of British Second World War films. The Prisoner. Robin Hood. Dick Turpin...[1]"
The political climate of Britain in the early 1980s also influenced the work,[3] with Moore positing that Margaret Thatcher's Conservative government would "obviously lose the 1983 elections", and that the Michael Foot-led Labour government that replaced it, being committed to complete nuclear disarmament, would allow the United Kingdom to escape relatively unscathed after a limited nuclear war. However, Moore felt that fascists would quickly subvert a post-holocaust Britain.[1] Moore's predictions proved unfounded and, addressing this when DC reissued the work, he noted:
Naïveté can also be detected in my supposition that it would take something as melodramatic as a near-miss nuclear conflict to nudge England towards fascism... The simple fact that much of the historical background of the story proceeds from a predicted Conservative defeat in the 1982 General Election should tell you how reliable we were in our roles as Cassandras.[4]
When the publishers cancelled Warrior in 1985 (with two completed episodes unpublished due to the cancellation), several companies attempted to convince Moore and Lloyd to let them publish and complete the story. In 1988 DC Comics published a ten-issue series that reprinted the Warrior stories in colour, then continued the series to completion. The first new material appeared in issue #7, which included the unpublished episodes that would have appeared in Warrior #27 and 28. Tony Weare drew one chapter ("Vincent") and contributed additional art to two others ("Valerie", "The Vacation"); Steve Whitaker and Siobhan Dodds worked as colourists on the entire series. The series, including Moore's "Behind the Painted Smile" essay and two "interludes" outside the central continuity, was then collected as a trade paperback, published in the US by DC's Vertigo imprint (ISBN 0-930289-52-8) and in the UK by Titan Books (ISBN 1-85286-291-2).
The February 1999 issue of The Comics Journal ran a poll on "The Top 100 (English-Language) Comics of the Century". V for Vendetta reached 83rd place.[5]

5 November 1997, London. A vigilante known as V rescues a young woman, Evey Hammond, from a gang of police agents (known as "Fingermen") who intend to rape her after arresting her for prostitution. After dispatching the Fingermen, V heads to a rooftop with Evey and detonates a bomb inside the abandoned Palace of Westminster, emulating the failed 1605 Gunpowder Plot. V takes Evey to his secret lair, which he calls "The Shadow Gallery." Evey tells V her life story, describing the nuclear war of the late 1980s which eventually led to the fascist coup d'état in Great Britain, after which the authorities rounded up her father as a political prisoner and presumably killed him.
Investigation of V's bombing falls to Eric Finch, the head of "The Nose" — the regular police force — and an experienced investigator who serves the government out of a love of order rather than from political conviction. Through him readers meet other figures in the Party, including the Leader, Adam Susan, who has a fixation with the government's computer system, Fate; Dominic Stone, Finch's partner; Derek Almond, head of "The Finger," the secret police; Conrad Heyer, head of "The Eye," the visual surveillance branch; Brian Etheridge, head of "The Ear," the audio surveillance branch; and Roger Dascombe, in charge of "The Mouth," the branch in charge of broadcasting propaganda.
V next blows up the Old Bailey, and confronts three Party figures to accuse them of and execute them for past atrocities: Lewis Prothero, the propaganda broadcaster who serves as the "Voice of Fate"; Bishop Anthony Lilliman, a paedophile priest who represents the Party in the clergy; and Delia Surridge, an apolitical doctor who once had a relationship with Finch. V drives Prothero insane after incinerating his prized doll collection; he kills Lilliman by forcing him to consume a cyanide-laced communion wafer; and Dr. Surridge dies from a lethal injection. However, because Surridge expressed remorse for her previous actions, she experiences a painless death. By the time V kills Surridge, Finch has discovered that all of V's victims worked at a concentration camp near the village of Larkhill, and alerts Derek Almond to V's plans. Almond surprises V attempting to escape from Surridge's home. Unfortunately for Almond, he had forgotten to reload his gun after having cleaned it earlier that same night, and V kills him.
Finch begins to read a diary kept by Dr. Surridge, discovered at her home. It reveals all of the victims' previous histories with V while he was an inmate at the Larkhill camp. V had forcibly taken part in a medical experiment run by Dr. Surridge in which he was given hormonal injections with a drug called "Batch 5." Eventually V, known to the camp's staff as the "Man from Room Five," began tending a garden with camp commander Prothero's approval, using related chemicals to later break out of the camp while attacking camp guards with homemade mustard gas and napalm. V, the only prisoner to have survived the death camp, chose to eliminate its surviving officers to prevent the government from discovering his true identity. Finch notes that while V made sure Surridge's diary was easy to find, he had also ripped out pages that may have contained information about his identity. With no records of his real identity existing, V can operate covertly.
Four months later, V breaks into Jordan Tower, the home of The Mouth, to broadcast a speech that calls on the people to take charge of their own lives. He escapes by forcing Roger Dascombe into one of his Fawkes costumes, causing him to be fatally shot by police who storm the room. Eric Finch, in going over the crime scene, is introduced to Peter Creedy, a petty criminal replacing Almond as head of The Finger. Finch is provoked into assaulting Creedy in frustration of Creedy's lack of appreciation of V's capability and over a personal remark Creedy made about Dr. Surridge. Following the incident, the Leader sends Finch on a forced vacation.
Evey has developed a strong attachment to V, but has begun to challenge his methods. After a confrontation in the Shadow Gallery, she finds herself abandoned on a street, unable to find V. She is taken in by Gordon Deitrich, a petty criminal with whom she becomes romantically involved, and they cross paths unknowingly with Derek Almond's widow Rose; after the deaths of her husband and Dascombe (with whom she had been forced into a relationship for financial reasons), Rose is forced to work as a burlesque dancer, and consequently develops a strong hatred for the Party. Creedy begins organizing a private militia, hoping to use V's destabilization of the Party to mount a coup against the Leader.
When Gordon is murdered by Scottish gangster Alistair Harper, Evey attempts to kill him in revenge but is abducted and accused of attempting to murder Peter Creedy as he was meeting with Harper. In her cell between multiple bouts of interrogation and torture, Evey finds a letter from an inmate named Valerie, an actress who was imprisoned for being a lesbian. Evey's interrogator finally gives her a choice of collaboration or death; inspired by Valerie's courage and quiet defiance, she refuses to give in and is told that she is free. To her shock, Evey learns that her imprisonment was a hoax constructed by V, designed to put her through an ordeal similar to the one that shaped him. He reveals that Valerie was another Larkhill prisoner who died in the cell next to his; the letter that Evey read is the same one that Valerie had passed on to V. Evey's anger finally gives way to acceptance of her identity and freedom.
The following November, exactly one year after the Parliament bombing, V destroys the Post Office Tower and Jordan Tower, causing the death of Etheridge, and effectively shutting down The Eye, The Ear, and The Mouth. The subsequent lack of government surveillance causes a wave of violence and hedonism which is violently suppressed by Creedy and Harper's street gangs. Meanwhile, V notes to Evey that this is not "The Land of Do-As-You-Please" end result he wants but rather the mere chaos in "The Land of Take-What-You-Want" — an interim period that he intends to follow up with the establishment of true anarchy, a voluntary orderly society. Finch's assistant Dominic realizes that V has had access to the Fate computer since the very beginning, explaining his foresight; this news accelerates the mental collapse of the Leader.
Finch travels to the abandoned site of Larkhill, where he takes LSD. His hallucinations lead him to an intuitive understanding of V, and returning to London, he deduces that V's lair is inside the abandoned Victoria Station. V confronts Finch as he enters the station. V, who has indicated his own martyrdom, lets Finch shoot him. The wounded V returns to the Shadow Gallery and dies in Evey's arms. Evey considers unmasking V, but decides not to; instead, she assumes his identity, donning one of his spare costumes.
Meanwhile, Creedy, trying to take Susan's job, pressures the Leader to appear in public. Rose Almond, angry at the death of her husband which has forced her into burlesque dancing, assassinates the Leader. Creedy tries to take his place, but Harper, bribed by Helen Heyer (with whom he has been sleeping), kills him. V sends a surveillance tape of the two having sex to her husband, Conrad Heyer (head of the Eye), who responds by beating Harper to death with a wrench, but not before Harper fatally wounds him with a razor. As a result, all key Party officials (the Leader, Fate, the head of the Finger, the head of the Eye, the head of the Ear, the head of the Mouth) are killed, with the exception of Finch (head of the Nose).
When Evey appears to the crowd as V, a general insurrection begins. Evey completes V's final act of subversion and destroys 10 Downing Street by giving her mentor a "Viking funeral" with an explosive-laden Underground train containing his body, sent to detonate beneath the desired location. She rescues Dominic from a mob and takes him back to the Shadow Gallery, implying that she intends to train him as her own successor. Finch observes the chaos raging in the city before heading to the countryside. All forms of authority in Britain are now gone; its future is left uncertain.



