List of 30 Rock episodes
30 Rock, a situation comedy television series, premiered on October 11, 2006 in the United States on NBC.[1] Created by Tina Fey, 30 Rock follows the lives of the head writer of TGS with Tracy Jordan (TGS), Liz Lemon (Tina Fey), the other staff members of TGS and their network executive, Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin). 30 Rock began its first season on October 11, 2006,[1] and concluded on April 26, 2007.[2] The second season debuted on October 4, 2007,[3] with a hiatus occurring after the tenth episode due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike.[4] The season resumed on April 10, 2008 and the fifth post-strike episode aired as the season finalé on May 8, 2008.[5][6][7] The third season premiered on October 30, 2008[8][9] and a fourth season has been announced.[10] As of April 25, 2009, 55 original episodes of 30 Rock have aired.
The first season has been released to Region 1 DVD by NBC Universal in the form of a season box set,[11] and a second version in which the season is split into two volumes.[12][13] NBC Universal also released season one to Region 2 DVD.[14] The second season was released to Region 1 DVD on October 7, 2008.[15]


Season one begins with the introduction of Liz Lemon who is the head writer of The Girlie Show, a live sketch comedy series which airs on NBC. When The Girlie Show's network executive Gary dies, Jack Donaghy replaces him. Jack, the head of east coast television and microwave oven programming, makes many changes to The Girlie Show, including adding Tracy Jordan (Tracy Morgan), a loose cannon movie star, to the show's cast and changing the title of The Girlie Show to TGS with Tracy Jordan. As the season progresses various plots and story arcs are explored, such as Liz's relationship with Floyd (Jason Sudeikis) and Jack's similar relationship with Phoebe (Emily Mortimer). A few minor story arcs are carried over into season two which include Cerie Xerox's (Katrina Bowden) ongoing engagement to the unseen character, Aris, and Pete Hornberger (Scott Adsit) living with Liz in order to deal with his marital problems with his wife Paula Hornberger (Paula Pell).

Season two begins with Liz and the crew of TGS returning from summer hiatus to many problems. An immediate problem is Jack being threatened by Jerry Seinfeld because Jack was planning to digitally insert Seinfeld into all of NBC's programming with edited footage from Seinfeld's sitcom Seinfeld.
The sophomore season, much like the first season, includes various plotlines including Jenna Maroney (Jane Krakowski) coping with her obesity problem which she developed during the summer while performing on the fictitious Broadway musical Mystic Pizza: The Musical. Another story arc includes the conservative Jack dating the Democratic congresswoman Celeste Cunningham (D-VT) (Edie Falco). Liz's attempts at recovering from her failed reunion with Floyd are also viewed as well as Tracy trying to deal with his failing marriage to Angie Jordan (Sherri Shepherd). Later, Tracy attempts to finish his masterpiece invention, a pornographic videogame.
As the season progresses, Jack and his rival Devon Banks (Will Arnett) both aspire to become the Chairman Of GE. When about to announce that Jack will be his successer, Don Geiss (Rip Torn), the current Chairman Of GE, slips into a diabetic coma. Taking advantage of this opportunity, Devon places his fiancee, Geiss' daughter, Cathy Geiss (Marceline Hugot) as the puppet GE Chairwoman.

