List of Death Note episodes
This is a list of episodes for the Japanese animated television series Death Note, based on the manga series written by Tsugumi Ohba and illustrated by Takeshi Obata. The series primarily centers around high school student Light Yagami, who decides to rid the world of evil with the help of a supernatural notebook that causes the death of anyone whose name is written in it. The book was property of Shinigami or God of Death, named Ryuk, who became bored with his place in the Shinigami world.[1]
Death Note aired in Japan on the Nippon Television network "every Tuesday at 24:56"[2] The first episode aired on October 3, 2006, and the last episode aired on June 26, 2007.[3][not in citation given] A special two-hour "Director's Cut" compilation episode, entitled "Death Note:R (Rewrite)", was aired on August 31, 2007.[1]
The series has been licensed for North American distribution by VIZ Media.[4] Significantly, episodes of the series will be officially available for download soon after they air in Japan;[4] according to VIZ, this is "the first time a well known Japanese anime property will be made legally available to domestic audiences for download to own while the title still airs on Japanese television".[4] VIZ Media began releasing these episodes via Direct2Drive on May 10, 2007.[5]
On October 21, 2007, Death Note premiered on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim.[6] The first episode had a "TV-14-V" rating, while the second was given a TV-14-LV rating. Most episodes have a TV-14 rating, except for the first 5, episode 12, episode 15, episode 17, which was TV-14-DV, episode 21, which was TV-14-DLV, episode 23, and episode 25. Episode 37 was given a TV-MA rating. Death Note episodes are also added to Adult Swim's streaming video service, Adult Swim Video, Fridays before airing on television. On October 26, 2007, it premiered on YTV's Bionix block.
On November 9, 2008, Death Note began airing weekly, at 3:30 a.m. Eastern Standard Time, starting with episode 1, "Rebirth" on the Cartoon Network's Adult Swim.
On October 2007, Hong Kong began airing the Cantonese version of Death Note at 12:00 am Saturday nights on TVB.
On April 14, 2008, Death Note premiered in Australia, where it airs on ABC 2 on Mondays at 9:30 pm.
In the first 19 episodes, the opening theme is "The World" by Nightmare, and the closing theme is "Alumina" (アルミナ ,Arumina?), also by Nightmare. "Alumina" also appears as the closing theme in the TV special "Death Note:R From Vision of God", and as an insert in episodes 12 and 19.
In the remaining episodes, the opening theme is "What's Up, People?!" by Maximum the Hormone. In episodes 20-36, the closing theme is "Zetsubō Billy" (絶望ビリー ,Zetsubō Birī?), also by Maximum the Hormone, while the closing theme for the final episode (episode 37) is "Coda ~ Death Note" by Yoshihisa Hirano. "Zetsubō Billy" also appears as an insert song in the "Director's Cut Complete Conclusion Rewrite: The Visualizing God".
"Misa no Uta" by Aya Hirano can be heard as an insert during episode 25. The English dub is performed by Misa's English dub actress, Shannon Chan-Kent.


The opening starts with a fly past an old, barren, desert-like plain, moving through a tunnel-like structure of, presumably, bones. Ryuk is sitting on the edge of a hill, overlooking the Realm of Shinigami. Shinigami are gambling with skulls, one of them asks Ryuk to join them in their game but he refuses. In the human world, high school student Light Yagami is seen bored in class, and other students are chatting among themselves. The teacher requests Light to translate an English sentence to Japanese, and Light does so with perfection. As Light walks home, news is being heard to be reporting about a death of a woman and an arrest of a man for rape and murder. Both Light and Ryuk's face come together, agreeing that the world is rotten.
Light, again, bored in class, notices a book drop from the sky to land on the floor. After school ends, Light walks past the book and hesitates before picking it up. He sees the book with the title written as Death Note. He opens it, reads the instruction on it, and laughs at "The human whose name is written in this note, shall die", thinking it to be a sick joke. After briefly discarding it he returns to put it in his bag. At home he reads the full list of instructions on the notebook in his room, still thinking it was a well thought-out prank. He begins to write in the notebook but then pauses, thinking that if someone died, he would be a murderer.
Later, after testing the note first on a criminal shown on TV, and second on the leader of a street gang who Light sees harassing a girl outside a bookstore, and seeing both victims die, Light concludes that the notebook is for real. He has a brief breakdown after he realises he has killed two people but quickly decides that he should use the notebook to cleanse the world of criminals.
Ryuk, in the Shinigami realm, says it’s been five days since he dropped his note to the Human realm and should be about time for him to leave. The other Shinigami are surprised he dropped his note in the Human realm. Ryuk walks down a long staircase to the entrance of the Humans realm, spread his wings and disappeared. Light returns home and passes his result booklet to his anxious mum, who is overjoyed to see her son getting first in examinations, and asks if Light has anything he wanted. Light replied no, thinking to himself that he has already got what he wanted. As he looks at the names he has written on the note, Ryuk appears behind him, much to Light's initial horror. After calming down Light tells Ryuk he has been expecting him. Ryuk is surprised that Light has done so much in only 5 days. Light asks if Ryuk is here to take his soul, and Ryuk tells him that the note is now property of the Human realm and is now Light’s. If Light should give it to someone else, then Ryuk will erase all his memories of it. There is no penalty for using the note, just that the user may experience torment it may bring and the user can neither go to heaven nor hell. When Light dies, Ryuk will be the one to write Light’s name on the note.
The episode starts with a reminder of the past scenes of Rebirth, they are the parts where Light uses the Death Note for testing and the encounter with Ryuk, the Shinigami. The 2nd episode begin after that. Light is in his classroom, other teenagers talking between themselves. Light writes in the Death Note that is hiding under his school books. The teacher asks him to translate a sentence from English to Japanese, and complements him for his excellent work, calling it "a perfect answer, as expected from Yagami-kun". Light walks ahead and Ryuk calls him. In the school's yard, Light tells Ryuk not to converse with him because others can hear his voice if he speaks. Ryuk finds it boring. A classmate invites Light to something but he cuts him off, saying that he is busy. Ryuk tells Light that he isn't busy, and asks if he isn't going straight home as always. Light answers, saying that he is busy with something very important.
In his room, Light is writing names in the note with his TV on, showing the news, while Ryuk lies on the bed, eating an apple. Ryuk comments that Light is working very hard, to which he answers that he couldn't waste time, that he could only write names on the note for a limited time each day, and still has to keep up his studies to produce top results, without sleep deprivation. Just then, Light's only and younger sister, Sayu, knocks on the door, asking him to help her with her math homework on quadratic equations, and Light accepts. Ryuk warns Light that if anyone touches the note they will be able to see Ryuk. Light is momentarily stunned but recovers and continues to help Sayu.
At ICPO, a briefing session was going on. 52 criminals have died from heart attacks this week and the conservative count of the total number might be around a 100. A comment was made that the criminals were on death row so it didn’t really matter, which sparked up a debate. They conclude it was murder by a large organization but had no idea of who might have done it, and decides to call upon the help of L, a mysterious genius who has solved many unsolvable cases world-wide. Watari, the only person who can contact L, then walks in to set up a laptop to connect to the people in meeting, so that they might hear what L has to say.
The scene then jumps to Light, at a secluded place, preparing a flammable liquid. He tells Ryuk that since anyone who touches the note can see Ryuk, he had to be very careful and if somebody from his household found the book, he might be forced to kill them. Then back at ICPO meeting, L says that this case is one of unprecedented scope, an atrocious crime of mass homicide that can only be solved with the help of the world’s investigation agencies, especially the Japanese police department. L has already concluded that the killer is, of a very high chance, in Japan.
Back at Light’s room, he explains to Ryuk that he has hidden the note in the drawer, beneath the false base, only leaving a normal diary on top to mislead people. Light then takes a normal ball-point pen, unscrews it and pokes the cartridge through a small hole at the bottom of the drawer, thus lifting up the false base to reveal the note. The cartridge, as well as a wedge stuck to the underside of the false base, acts as an insulator to prevent current from flowing in the wires, surrounding the note, to ignite the flammable liquid in a capsule. If someone removes the base by force, then the circuit would be triggered and the note burnt. Ryuk then tells Light that most people have trouble hiding the book and Light is the first to go this far in hiding it.
On the streets of Japan, people are all praising Kira for killing of the bad guys. Light entered one of such websites that is dedicated to Kira and showed them to Ryuk, feeling triumphant. Light tells Ryuk that even though the papers are reporting felons’ deaths as mysterious deaths, people in the world already feel that someone is passing righteous judgment on them. Light then tells Ryuk that humans are hypocrites, and if they were asked if killing criminals are fine, humans would always pretend to be good and condemn the act, but in fact they are all happy and praise it. Then an international broadcast from ICPO flashes on the TV screen.
The episode begins at a meeting of NPA, where the police authority discusses recent observations relating to Kira. Some of the observations include counts of reports from individuals who claim they knew, seen or that they were Kira, the times in which KIRA had probably killed the criminals which concluded that during weekdays, deaths occurred during 4pm to 2am in which 68% were between 8pm to midnight, during Saturday and Sundays, there was a balance in the death patterns from 11pm to around 2-3am. L requested the latter information and hence concluded that Kira may be a student. The justification he uses for this assumption is that the times suit the free time of school students and that victims of Kira are criminals, and so suggesting that Kira was trying to bring justice, an ideal of naive mentality. L then requests all to remove personal bias that it cannot be an act of a student and must accept all possibilities. Shortly after, Matsuda puts forward the fact that crime rate has decreased since the appearance of Kira (especially in Japan). The meeting ends with L's request to the NPA to research how the victims of Kira were publicised. i.e. by internet, TV news etc.
After the meeting, Matsuda and Soichiro have an encounter in which Matsuda apologises about the information that he put forward about how crime rates were decreasing. Soichiro stands up for Matsuda and commends him for his courage to report and not discriminating the facts. At home, Light helps Sayu with her homework, in which this time their father comes home earlier than usual. Ryuk asks Light how he can manage to waste time helping with Sayu's homework. Light replies with confidence that he can gain insight to the movement of police. We shortly find out that the father is Soichiro. Ryuk understands the Light's reply moments ago as Light hacks into his father's police files and soon realising that the police has made an assumption of Kira as a student. Over the next two days, Light kills a person every hour, killing 23 a day. This has prompted the police to re-examine the suggestion where Kira is a student. However, L still keeps to his assumption and suggests to the police that Kira is saying "I choose the time in which I kill freely".
There is a transition of scenes in which L becomes suspicious that Kira has access to the police and Light tells Ryuk that it's not him that will find L, but the police (as L and police work together to find Kira) and that Light will merely get rid of L with the help of police. Three officers resign from the department fearing that they may fall victims of Kira unlike L claiming that L is the safe one because Kira doesn't know his face or his name. Whilst in college, Ryuk notices a stalker and there is a voice-over of Watari telling L that FBI have arrived since 4 days ago, suggesting that the stalker is FBI. Watari has also given research files to L of the NPA (done by FBI) and their details.
Presented with the Shinigami Eyes deal, Light tells Ryuk that it is out of the question. He explains that he’s trying to create an ideal world with no criminals, and as the god of such a world, he has to reign for a long time. Light claims that he would consider a deal for wings, but he’s actually joking. He amusingly says that if he made those kinds of deals, he’d be made into a real Shinigami before he’d know it. In response, Ryuk tells Light not to worry because he feels that Light is already a splendid Shinigami. Light, however, doesn’t want to be put together with Shinigami because he is using the Death Note as a human for the sake of humans. Flipping through it, he suddenly comes to a realization that he thinks will allow him to learn the name of the person who’s following him. But first, he wants to test out the extent to which he can dictate the details of a death.
The next day, Light’s father gets a call at work that reports six new deaths. However, three of them were strange: one drew a pentagram in blood before he died, one wrote a note, and the final one escaped, but went to a restroom and died. After learning of all this from Watari, L thinks that tells the police not to announce anything on these aside from the usual heart attack. However, Kira already knows the results because he’s able to access his father’s computer and thus the police records. All of them had died just like he wrote down for in the Death Note. However, there were the other three criminals too, and Light had given them all unreasonable death conditions, such as dying in front of the Eiffel Tower when the person was in a Japanese prison. From them, Light learned that the Death Note cannot do the impossible, but can do whatever is humanly possible for the criminal. As for the pentagram and the dying message, those are both things to throw L and the police off his tracks. Indeed, L is at that moment noticing a hidden line formed by the first character of each line of the dying message.
As for Light’s real plan, it involves a man who failed to rob a bank and ended up shooting people before escaping. It also involves a phone call to a girl that Light knows. Ryuk finds out later that Light is going on a date with that girl, named Yuri, to an amusement park. Watching from the shadows at the bus station, the man following Light thinks that Light is normal and not suspicious. In any case, he’s not going to be doing this anymore after today, and so he boards the bus, sitting right behind Light and Yuri. At a stop further down the road, they pick up a seedy looking man who is the failed bank robber that Light saw on the news. As expected by Light, the criminal pulls out a gun and holds the bus hostage, ordering the driver to call the amusement park and demanding their sales money. While everyone else is being afraid, Light writes a note to Yuri saying that he’ll take on the hijacker. When the man following Light sees the note, he tells Light not to do it and decides to take action himself. Light first questions the guy for proof that he’s not an accomplice since there have been cases where a second criminal acts as a lookout from the back for the first. To prove who he is, the man hands over his FBI credentials to Light, which show that the man’s name is Raye Penber. Since Penber has a gun, Light decides to leave it up to him.
Just as Penber is realizing that the person holding them hostage is the one who was on the news, Light drops a piece of paper. Penber panics because he thinks that it’s the note that Light wrote to Yuri earlier, but when the criminal notices and picks it up, he finds out that it has only got Light’s plans for the date written on it. Suddenly, however, the hijacker is able to see Ryuk. At first, Ryuk is confused, but he soon realizes that Light had dropped a piece of the Death Note, and by touching it, the hijacker is now able to see him. The scared robber empties his gun into Ryuk, but all the bullets fly right through and hit the back window of the bus. Ryuk remembers telling Light that a person touching the Death Note allows him or her to see Ryuk, that Ryuk would always be behind him, and that the Shinigami won’t die from getting shot by a gun. All of these things have come into play here and have allowed Light to use a hijacker to figure out the name of the person who was following him.
In the aftermath of the hijacker’s death, Raye Penber wants his involvement in all this kept a secret because of his own mission. Fortunately, this works just as Light had planned because he doesn’t want his father or L to know about it either. Raye returns to his hotel room where he tells his fiancée, who used to be an FBI investigator, about the incident. She’s worried that it wasn’t just a coincidence, but he doesn’t want her to play the part of the investigator anymore because she’s his fiancée now. Light meanwhile still hasn’t written down Raye’s name in the Death Note because he doesn’t want to arouse suspicion so soon after meeting the agent. For now, he decides to send L another message through a prisoner. L immediately notices that the top line of the new note continues with a sentence about the Shinigami.
It is on December 27th that Light enters a crowded underground shopping area with Ryuk. He’s been conducting some experiments which have taught him that you can write the circumstances and cause of death in the Death Note ahead of time. It will still work when you fill out the name later. As Ryuk is thinking that he didn’t know this, Raye appears, so Light hides himself. Light’s plan starts when he gets behind Raye and introduces himself as Kira. To prove who he is, he kills what seems to be a random employee from a nearby store, though Light later explains that it was a rapist who was never convicted because of insufficient evidence. Light suggests that there’s someone important to Raye that he can take hostage, making Raye think of his fiancée.
After he gives Raye an envelope that contains a transceiver, Light walks off so that he can communicate from a distance. He has Raye get on a train and sit in a seat by the door where he then interrogates Raye about the other FBI agents in Japan. Light has Raye write down all the agents’ names on special sheets of paper, before giving the instructions to leave the envelope with papers and transceiver on the train. As soon as Raye disembarks the train, he gets a heart attack. Raye turns around to see the door closing on Yagami Light, but this realization comes too late. At home, Light inspects those special sheets of paper, which were actually pages of the Death Note. Raye had filled in names into the right slots, but what were hidden from him were the descriptions of death circumstances.
The news of the FBI agents’ deaths soon reaches L, who gets a call from the head of the FBI. They are pulling the plug on their investigation in Japan, and the head also inform Light’s father about it all. Given the lack of trust with L and with the deaths of the FBI agents, the Japanese detectives on the case are getting uneasy about their involvement. Around this time, L is notified of another note that a prisoner left. This time, the hidden message talks about apples. As Light knows, the entire sentence put together is asking if L knows that the Shinigami love apples. At home, Light’s father tells his family about his involvement in the dangerous case. His wife and Sayu are very worried for his life, but he vows not to give up on it. Light declares that he’s proud of his father and says that if something were to happen, then he’d personally send Kira to his death.
The next day, after having grieved over his death, Raye’s fiancée interviews the bus driver from the hostage incident. However, the driver doesn’t remember anyone other than Raye, leaving his fiancée little to go on other than her suspicion that Kira was among the bus passengers. Light’s father meanwhile is giving all of his men the option to leave because of the danger of the mission. In the end, only five of them stay - six if he counts himself. L believes that only they have a strong sense of justice, but the men still don’t trust in L. Light’s father suggests that L come to the police headquarters, but L has a different plan. Since he only trusts them, he types them a message on Watari’s computer. In it, he asks them to keep what happens from now on a secret. He is considering meeting them, but he wants them first to go and decide if they can trust him or not.
A bit surprised by L’s appearance, the police group (Yagami, Matsuda, Aizawa, Mogi, and Ukita) introduces themselves, but L warns them to be more careful in giving away their names since Kira can kill with a name and a face. In order not to be interrupted, L asks them to turn off their phones and put them aside. He also insists on being called Ryuuzaki instead of L. Matsuda suggests that they just not release information about the criminals, but L thinks that Kira would then kill ordinary people since he feels that Kira is a childish person who hates to lose. L admits to being the same way and recounts how Kira killed the initial fake L on TV after being challenged and how Kira’s killing patterns are as if he were responding to their moves. He thinks that Kira would just hold the world hostage while blaming the police for withholding criminal information. Instead of going with Matsuda’s idea, L suggests that they announce the killings of the FBI agents causing 1500 additional international investigators to come to Japan, even though it’s not true. He hopes that this will pressure a reaction out of Kira.
L then reveals a few more things he’s figured out including how Kira is acting alone and how Kira can manipulate a person’s actions before death. He pulls out a pen and starts writing days, outlining what happened between when the FBI agents entered the country and when they were all dead. This time line includes the people Kira killed to test the extent of his power, and L concludes that Kira must be someone the FBI was investigating. The police group is quite impressed by all this, though Light’s father asks L if revealing himself is an acknowledgment that he failed against Kira. L does indeed feel that way, but he also thinks that he and justice will definitely win. Around this same time, Light is at home going over what he did on those same dates. Both L and Light know that it would only take one mistake for things to turn against Kira.
Confident that he hasn’t made any mistakes, Light offers to take a change of clothes to his father at the police station for his mother. Just in case, he brings with him a piece of the Death Note. When he gets there, he sees a woman at the front desk who is asking about speaking to the investigators on the Kira case. After he hands over the clothes to the receptionist, Light reveals that he is the son of the head of the investigation and offers to let her talk to him when his father calls. The two go outside where Light starts discussing Kira, but then realizes that he doesn’t know the woman’s name. Light intentionally introduces himself with his full name, including how it’s spelled out in kanji, which prompts her to tell him her name - Maki Shouko - in the same way.
Armed with that knowledge, Light pretends to have a theory that Kira can control someone before he kills them. Maki had the same idea and also thinks that Kira can kill people with ways other than heart attacks. As she reveals that she had an FBI agent fiancé who probably met Kira, Light realizes that she’s talking about Raye Penber. Her own investigation has led her to link the bus hijacking with the deaths of the FBI agents and her belief that Kira’s killing methods are not limited to heart attacks. She’s sure that the hijacker was controlled before he died because Raye had told her that he had to show his FBI ID to someone on the bus, thereby leaking the existence of the FBI in Japan.
Knowing that he has to deal with Maki Shouko or else she’ll lead the police towards finding out who he really is, Light decides to pretend to take notes about the bus hijacking so that he can write on the piece of Death Note that he’s carrying with him. Ryuk starts laughing as Light is writing out the circumstances of her suicide starting at 1:15PM, and much to Light’s surprise, nothing happens when that time comes and goes. He knows that just writing suicide on the Death Note works because of the tests that he conducted, but since nothing is happening to her, something must be wrong. It is because of Ryuk’s continued laughter that Light soon realizes that Maki Shouko must be an alias. He concludes that she must be using this name because of how Raye died after he showed his ID, but Light’s problem now is how to learn her real name. He can’t just ask her for it without arousing suspicion since she already told him a fake one.
The woman then suggests that they return to police headquarters in case someone came back. As Light panics a bit and examines his options, Ryuk reminds him that there’s still the Shinigami eyes trade. However, Light still doesn’t consider that a deal he can make. When she stops and suggests that she can go to the police station on her own, Light knows that he has to make a move quickly. He decides to tell her that it’s impossible to directly talk to the people working on the case at headquarters because they’re concealing themselves to prevent what happened with Raye from happening again. As for why he knows this, Light pretends to reveal that he’s a member of the investigation that is being led by L. The woman still wants to talk to the police and to L, explaining that she’s worked under L before on a previous case. Upon learning that she used to be in the FBI up until three months ago, Light pretends to offer to let her onto the team. He notes that the three conditions are that she has some sort of ID, a recommendation of someone already on the team, and L’s personal approval. Drawing her into the idea, Light suggests that since he can recommend her for the team, all of this is due to fate.
Around this time, L is still in the meeting with Light’s father and the other detectives. He introduces them to the real Watari, who is actually an elderly man. Watari has brought special badges for each of them to use as fake identification so that Kira won’t find out who they are. He also provides them with special belts equipped with transmitters to allow L to know where they are. In addition, pressing the buckle twice will call Watari’s cell phone. L then suggests that they should keep 
