Rotator cuff
The rotator cuff (rotor cuff) is an anatomical term given to the group of muscles and their tendons that act to stabilize the shoulder. Along with the teres major and the deltoid, the four muscles of the rotator cuff make up the six scapulohumeral (those that connect to the humerus and scapula and act on the glenohumeral joint) muscles of the human body.

The rotator cuff muscles are important in shoulder movements and in maintaining glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint) stability. [1]These muscles arise from the scapula and connect to the head of the humerus forming a cuff at the shoulder joint. They hold the head of the humerus in the small and shallow glenoid fossa of the scapula. The glenohumeral joint is often likened to a golf ball(head of the humerus) sitting on a golf tee(glenoid fossa). During abduction of the arm, the rotator cuff compresses the glenohumeral joint in order to allow the large deltoid muscle to further elevate the arm. In other words, without the rotator cuff, the humeral head would ride up partially out of the glenoid fossa, lessening the efficiency of the deltoid muscle. During flexion of the arm infraspinatus and subscapularis act as joint stabilizers. During extension subscapularis and supraspinatus help stabilize the shoulder joint. Subscapularis stabilizes the joint during external rotation.[1]

The mnemonic 'SITS', sometimes written 'SItS' as an additional hint that the teres minor is a member, is often used to remember the four muscles of the rotator cuff.[2]


The tendons at the ends of the rotator cuff muscles can become torn, leading to pain and restricted movement of the arm. A torn rotator cuff can occur following a trauma to the shoulder or it can occur through "wear and tear" of the tendons (most commonly that of the supraspinatus) under the acromion. It is an injury frequently sustained by athletes whose duties involve making repetitive throws, such as baseball pitchers, American football quarterbacks, volleyball (due to their swinging motions), water polo players, swimmers, boxers, kayaking, fast bowlers in cricket, and tennis players (due to their service motion). This type of injury also commonly affects conductors (music), choral conductor, orchestral conductor, due to the swinging motions and other movements used to lead their ensemble. It is commonly associated with motions that require repeated overhead motions or forceful pulling motions.

A systematic review of relevant research found that the accuracy of the physical examination is low.[3] The Hawkins-Kennedy test[4][5] has a sensitivity of approximately 80% to 90% for detecting impingement. The infraspinatus and supraspinatus[6] tests have a specificity of 80% to 90%.[3]


As with all muscle injuries, R.I.C.E. is the modality recommended by physicians, DOs, physical therapists, athletic trainers, and chiropractors.[citation needed]
Cold compression therapy is very useful for all muscle tears and strains as it reduces pain and swelling. Using a cold compression therapy wrap for 15 minutes before sleeping can aid in reducing the pain that causes restless sleep.[citation needed]

The rotator cuff can be strengthened to rehabilitate shoulder injuries, and prevent future ones. There are different exercises to target the individual rotator cuff muscles.
Strengthening the rotator cuff allows for increased loads in a variety of exercises. When weightlifters are unable to increase the weight they can lift on a pushing exercise (such as the bench press or military press) for an extended period of time, strengthening the rotator cuff can often allow them to begin making gains again. It also prevents future injuries to the glenohumeral joint, balancing the often-dominant internal rotators with stronger external rotators. Finally, exercising the rotator cuff can lead to improved posture, as without exercise to the external rotator, the internal rotators can see a shortening, leading to tightness. This often manifests itself as rounded shoulders in the population.

Even for full thickness rotator cuff tears, conservative care outcomes are usually reasonable[7] However, many patients still suffer disability and pain despite non-surgical therapies. For massive tears of the rotator cuff, surgery has shown durable outcomes on 10 year follow-up.[8] However, the same study demonstrated ongoing and progressive fatty atrophy and re-tears of the rotator cuff. Shen has shown that MRI evidence of fatty atrophy in the rotator cuff prior to surgery is predicative of a poor surgical outcome.[9] To address this issue of failure of surgical repair and poor conservative care outcomes caused by muscular atrophy, bioengineering may be the answer. Mesenchymal stem cells have been shown to differentiate into skeletal muscle.[10] The first commercial applications that demonstrate rotator cuff repair on high field MRI using percutaneously implanted stem cells are just reaching the marketplace.[11] If the rotator cuff is completely torn, surgery is usually required to reattach the tendon to the bone.[1]

Diagram of the human shoulder joint
Suprascapular and axillary nerves of right side, seen from behind.
The suprascapular, axillary, and radial nerves.


