Giorgio Moroder
Giorgio Moroder (born on April 26, 1940 in Ortisei, Italy)[1] is an Italian record producer, songwriter and performer, whose groundbreaking work with synthesizers during the 1970s and 1980s was a significant influence on new wave, house, techno and electronic music in general. Particularly well known for his work with Donna Summer during the era of disco (including "I Feel Love"), Moroder is the founder of the former Musicland Studios in Munich, which served as a recording home for artists ranging from Led Zeppelin and Queen to Elton John for much of the 1980s and 1990s. He also has his own record label the Oasis Records who later became a subdivision of Casablanca Records.
In addition to his work with Donna Summer, Moroder also produced a number of electronic disco hits for The Three Degrees, two albums for Sparks, and produced songs for a variety of others including Swedish-born Madleen Kane, Melissa Manchester, Debbie Harry, Japan, and France Joli.

Often collaborating with lyricist Bellotte, Moroder scored a number of hits in his own name including "Son Of My Father" in 1972 and "From Here to Eternity" in 1977, and in the following year releasing "Chase" in 1978, the theme from the film Midnight Express. All were hits in the UK. The full movie score for Midnight Express won him his first Academy Award for best film score in 1978. In 1979 Moroder released his album E=MC². Text on the album's cover stated that it was the "first electronic live-to-digital album." He also released three albums between 1977-1979 under the name Munich Machine.
In 1984, Moroder worked with Philip Oakey, frontman of the popular synthpop group, The Human League, to make the album Philip Oakey & Giorgio Moroder; they scored a UK singles chart hit with "Together in Electric Dreams", titlescore track to the movie of the same name. In 1986, Moroder collaborated with his protege Harold Faltermeyer (of "Axel F." fame) and lyricist Tom Whitlock to create the score for the popular film Top Gun (1986), with the most noteworthy hit being the Berlin classic, "Take My Breath Away", which went on to become a huge hit for the group. "Chase" was also used as an entrance theme for wrestling's (then) popular heel group The Midnight Express. In 1987, Moroder produced Falco's song "Body Next to Body".
On September 20, 2004 Moroder was honored at the Dance Music Hall of Fame ceremony, held in New York, when he was inducted for his many outstanding achievements and contributions as producer. In 2005, he was given the title of Commendatore by the then President of the Italian Republic, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.

In 1984, Moroder compiled a new restoration and edit of the famous silent film Metropolis and provided a 80s Pop soundtrack to the film. This soundtrack includes pop tracks from the likes of Pat Benatar, Jon Anderson, Adam Ant, Billy Squier, Loverboy, Bonnie Tyler and Freddie Mercury. He also integrated the old-fashioned intertitles into the film as subtitles as a means of improving continuity, and he also played the film at a rate of 24 frames per second. Since one does not know the correct film speed this choice was controversial. The slightly faster speed makes this version only 80 minutes in length. Known as the "Moroder version", it sparked heated debate among film buffs and fans, with outspoken critics and supporters of the film falling into equal camps. If nothing else, it introduced the silent classic to a new generation of fans.
He also scored other popular films in the 1970s and 1980s including Midnight Express, American Gigolo, Flashdance, The Never Ending Story, Thief of Hearts, Electric Dreams, Cat People, Over the Top and Scarface. The latter score has recently regained popularity due to its use in the popular video game Grand Theft Auto III (and Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories). Moroder's "From Here to Eternity" and "Chase" were also used in the Sony PlayStation Portable and PlayStation 2 game Grand Theft Auto: Liberty City Stories. "Together In Electric Dreams", a collaborative effort of Giorgio Moroder and Philip Oakey (of The Human League) features in Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories. Moroder wrote the official theme songs, "Reach Out", for the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics, and "Hand in Hand", for the 1988 Seoul Olympics and "Un'estate Italiana" for the 1990 Football World Cup. "The Chase" is now also well-known as the theme bumper-music for the popular late-night AM talk radio program Coast to Coast AM.
In 2002 he provided the score for Leni Riefenstahl's final film, Impressionen unter Wasser a marine documentary.[2]






