Reference management software
Reference management software, citation management software or personal bibliographic management software is software for scholars and authors to use for recording and utilising bibliographic citations (references). Once a citation has been recorded, it can be used time and again in generating bibliographies, such as lists of references in scholarly books, articles and essays. The development of reference management packages has been driven by the rapid expansion of scientific literature.
These software packages normally consist of a database in which full bibliographic references can be entered, plus a system for generating selective lists or articles in the different formats required by publishers and learned journals. Modern reference management packages can usually be integrated with word processors so that a reference list in the appropriate format is produced automatically as an article is written, reducing the risk that a cited source is not included in the reference list. They will also have a facility for importing the details of publications from bibliographic databases.
Reference management software does not do the same job as a bibliographic database, which tries to list all articles published in a particular discipline or group of disciplines; examples are those provided by Ovid Technologies (e.g. Medline), the Institute for Scientific Information (e.g. Web of Knowledge) or monodisciplinary learned societies e.g. the American Psychological Association (PsycINFO). These databases are large and have to be housed on major server installations. Reference management software collects a much smaller database, of the publications that have been used or are likely to be used by a particular author or group, and such a database can easily be housed on an individual's personal computer.
Except for managing references, most reference management software also enables users to search references from online libraries. Those online libraries are usually based on Z3950 public protocol. Users just need to specify the IP address, database name and keywords to start a Z39.50 search. It's more quick and efficient than web browser. However, Z3950 is a little out of date. Some popular scientific websites do not support Z39.50 protocol, such as Google Scholar, IEEExploer, Arxiv, etc.


