Tall poppy syndrome
Tall Poppy Syndrome (TPS) is a pejorative term used in Australia, New Zealand and Canada to describe what is seen as a levelling social attitude. Someone is said to be a target of tall poppy syndrome when his or her assumption of a higher economic, social, or political position is criticised as being presumptuous, attention seeking, or without merit. Alternatively, it is seen as a societal phenomenon in which people of genuine merit are criticised or resented because their talents or achievements elevate them above or distinguish them from their peers.

The term originates from accounts in Aristotle's Politics (Book 5, Chapter 10) and Livy's History of Rome, Book I. Aristotle wrote: "Periander advised Thrasybulus by cutting the tops of the tallest ears of corn, meaning that he must always put out of the way the citizens who overtop the rest." In Livy's account, the tyrannical Roman King, Tarquin the Proud, received a messenger from his son Sextus Tarquinius asking what he should do next in Gabii, since he had become all-powerful there. Rather than answering the messenger verbally, Tarquin went into his garden, took a stick, and symbolically swept it across his garden, thus cutting off the heads of the tallest poppies that were growing there. The messenger, tired of waiting for an answer, returned to Gabii and told Sextus what he had seen. Sextus realised that his father wished him to put to death all of the most eminent people of Gabii, which he then did.

This phenomenon is often interpreted[who?] as being based on and resulting from a resentment of others' success[citation needed]. On the other side of the coin, however, such critics see themselves, not as envious, but as justly deflating the pretensions of those who take themselves too seriously or flaunt their success without due humility.[citation needed] Apparent cases of tall poppy syndrome are thus often explained as resentment not of success but of snobbery and arrogance. Those whose approach to success is seen as suitably humble can escape. Examples of people who have achieved success and wealth without attracting such hostility include Australian Dick Smith and New Zealander Stephen Tindall.[citation needed]
Tall poppy syndrome is frequently invoked[who?] as an explanation when a public figure is on the receiving end of negative publicity — even if such publicity can be seen as a result of that person's own misconduct.[citation needed] In Australia, this claim has been made in the cases involving John Laws, Alan Jones, Alan Bond, Ray Williams.
Belief in the strength of this cultural phenomenon, and the degree to which it represents a negative trait, is to some extent influenced by politics. Conservative commentators[who?] often criticise Australians for their alleged desire to punish the successful. Sometimes, tall poppy syndrome is claimed to be linked to the concept of 'The Politics of Envy'[who?]. Critics of the tall poppy syndrome[who?] sometimes declare that the United States is relatively free of “tall poppy” attitudes. Americans are thought to appreciate the successful, seeing them as an example to admire and attempt to emulate. In the cultures of the UK and Commonwealth nations, such commentators assert, many resent success of their fellows.[citation needed]
Some commentators[citation needed] have argued that tall poppy syndrome is a universal phenomenon, that is more common in some cultures. The concepts of janteloven, or "Jante law", in Scandinavia, and A kent yer faither (English: I knew your father) in Scotland, are very similar. Similar phenomena are said to exist in the Netherlands and American minority communities. Benjamin Franklin Fairless, president of United States Steel Corporation (1950), criticised such behaviour when he stated: "You cannot strengthen one by weakening another; and you cannot add to the stature of a dwarf by cutting off the leg of a giant."[1]
A related concept is that of a crab mentality in which members of a disadvantaged community are seen as undermining the success of community members. The image is drawn from the observation that a crab clawing its way out of a bucket (or barrel in other versions) is pulled back down by his fellows.




