H-1B visa
The H-1B is a non-immigrant visa in the United States under the Immigration & Nationality Act, section 101(a)(15)(H). It allows U.S. employers to temporarily employ foreign workers in specialty occupations.
The regulations define a “specialty occupation” as requiring theoretical and practical application of a body of highly specialized knowledge in a field of human endeavor[1] including, but not limited to, architecture, engineering, mathematics, physical sciences, social sciences, biotechnology, medicine and health, education, law, accounting, business specialties, theology, and the arts, and requiring the attainment of a bachelor’s degree or its equivalent as a minimum[2] (with the exception of fashion models, who must be "of distinguished merit and ability".)[3] Likewise, the foreign worker must possess at least a bachelor’s degree or its equivalent and state licensure, if required to practice in that field. H-1B work-authorization is strictly limited to employment by the sponsoring employer.

The duration of stay is three years, extendable to six. An exception to maximum length of stay applies in certain circumstances:

The current law limits to 65,000 the number of aliens who may be issued a visa or otherwise provided H-1B status. (The numerical limitation was temporarily raised to 195,000 in FY2001, FY2002 and FY2003.) In addition, excluded from the ceiling are all H-1B non-immigrants who work at (but not necessarily for) universities and non-profit research facilities. [4] This means that contractors working at, but not directly employed by the institution may be exempt from the cap. Free Trade Agreements allow a carve out from the numerical limit of 1,400 for Chilean nationals and 5,400 for Singapore nationals. Laws also exempt up to 20,000 foreign nationals holding a master’s or higher degree from U.S. universities from the cap on H-1B visas.
The Department of Homeland Security approved about 132,000 H-1B visas in 2004 and 117,000 in 2005.[5]
Visa renewals do not count towards the annual limits. Transfers among employers only count when changing jobs from an employer exempt from the limits (academia or research) to one that is not exempt.

The U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) is responsible for ensuring that foreign workers do not displace or adversely affect wages or working conditions of U.S. workers.
The Department of Labor states that the H-1B law doesn't require employers to seek local talent before recruiting abroad for their US job openings, except in limited circumstances when the employer is considered H-1B dependent:
The DOL's Strategic Plan, Fiscal Years 2006-2011 (pg. 35) states: "... H-1B workers may be hired even when a qualified U.S. worker wants the job, and a U.S. worker can be displaced from the job in favor of the foreign worker."
The Federal Register, dated June 30, 2006, Section II, paragraph 4, "the statute does not require employers...to demonstrate that there are no available US workers or to test the labor market for US workers as required under the permanent labor certification program."
Employers must attest that wages offered are at least equal to the actual wage paid by the employer to other workers with similar experience and qualifications for the job in question, or alternatively, pay the prevailing wage for the occupation in the area of intended employment, whichever is greater. By signing the LCA (Labor Condition Application), the employer attests that: prevailing wage rate for area of employment will be paid; working conditions of position will not adversely affect conditions of similarly employed American workers; place of employment not experiencing labor dispute involving a strike or lockout.
Prior to 2005, the law required H-1B workers to be paid the higher of the prevailing wage for the same occupation and geographic location or that which the employers pays to similarly situated employees. Other factors, such as age and skill were not permitted to be taken into account for the prevailing wage. Congress changed the program in 2004 to require the Department of Labor to provide four skill-based prevailing wage levels for employers to use. Employers using this system classify most workers at the lowest skill level. This is the only prevailing wage mechanism the law permits that incorporates factors other than occupation and location.
The law specifically limits the approval process of LCAs to checking for "obvious errors and inaccuracies."[6] The approval process for these employer attestations simply amounts to the checking the form is filled out correctly. The employer is, however, advised of their liability if they are replacing a US worker.

In 2007, the U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration (ETA), reported on two programs, the High Growth Training Initiative and Workforce Innovation Regional Economic Development (WIRED), which have received or will receive $284 million and $260 million, respectively, from H-1B training fees to education and train U.S. workers[citation needed].

The taxation of income for H-1B employees depends on their tax residency: whether they are categorized as Resident Aliens or Non Resident Aliens for tax purposes.
The tax residency can be determined based on the "substantial presence test".
If the substantial presence test indicates that the H-1B visa holder is a resident, then income taxation is like any other US person and may be filed using Form 1040 and the necessary schedules. Otherwise the visa holder must file as a non-resident alien using tax form 1040NR; he or she may claim benefit from Tax Treaties if they exist between the US and the visa holder's country of citizenship.
Persons who are in their first year within the US may choose to be considered a resident for taxation purposes for the entire year, and must pay taxes on their worldwide income for that year. This "First Year Choice" is described in IRS Publication 519 and can only be made once in a person's lifetime.
A spouse, regardless of visa status, must have a valid ITIN or Social Security Number in order to be included on a joint tax return with the H-1B holder.

According to the USCIS, "H-1B aliens may only work for the petitioning U.S. employer and only in the H-1B activities described in the petition. The petitioning U.S. employer may place the H-1B worker on the worksite of another employer if all applicable rules (e.g., Department of Labor rules) are followed. H-1B aliens may work for more than one U.S. employer, but must have a Form I-129 petition approved by each employer."[7]

In theory, the maximum duration of the H-1B visa is six years (ten years for exceptional Defense Department project-related work). H-1B holders who want to continue to work in the U.S. after six years, but who have not obtained permanent residency status, must remain outside of the U.S. for one year before reapplying for another H-1B visa.
There are generally two exceptions to the six-year duration of the H-1B visa:

Even though the H-1B visa is a non-immigrant visa, it is one of the few visa categories recognized as dual intent, meaning an H-1B holder can have legal immigration intent (apply for and obtain the green card) while still a holder of the visa. In the past the employment-based green card process used to take only a few years, less than the duration of the H-1B visa itself. However, in recent times the legal employment-based immigration process has backlogged and retrogressed to the extent that it now takes many years for skilled professional applicants from certain countries to obtain their green cards. Since the duration of the H-1B visa hasn't changed, this has meant a lot more H-1B visa holders have to renew their visas in 1 year or 3 year increments to continue to be in legal status while their green card application is in process.

The number of new H-1Bs issued each year in the United States is subject to an annual congressionally-mandated quota. Each H-1B quota applies to a particular Financial Year which begins on October 1. Applications for the upcoming Financial Year are accepted beginning on the preceding April 1 (or the first working day after that date). Those beneficiaries not subject to the annual quota are those who currently hold H-1B status or have held H-1B status at some point in the past six years and have not been outside the United States for more than 365 consecutive days. This annual quota has had a significant impact on the high tech industry. It has generally been set at 65,000 visas per year, with some exceptions for workers at exempt organizations like universities and colleges (note: contrary to popular belief, non-profit organizations are not automatically exempt, but may be so if affiliated with a university or college). In 2000, Congress permanently exempted H-1B visas going to Universities and Government Research Laboratories from the quota.
During the early years of this quota in the early 1990s, this quota was rarely actually reached. By the mid-1990s, however, the quota tended to be filled each year on a first come, first served basis, resulting in new H-1Bs often being denied or delayed because the annual quota was already filled. In 1998 the quota was increased first to 115,000 and then, in 2000, to 195,000 visas per year. During the years the quota was 195,000, it was never reached.
In FY 2004, the quota reverted to 90,000 when the temporary increase passed by Congress in 1999 expired. Since then, the quota is again filling up rapidly every year, making H-1Bs again increasingly hard to get. More recently, the basic quota was left at 65,000 but with an additional 20,000 visas possible for foreign workers with U.S. advanced degrees. Of the 65,000 total, 6,800 are initially reserved for citizens of Chile and Singapore under free trade agreements with those countries; however, if these reserved visas are not used under the agreements, they go back to the general pool. Outside of the 65,000 quota, another 10,500 visas annually are available to Australian citizens under a similar but more flexible program, the E-3 visa program.
For FY 2007, beginning on October 1, 2006, the entire quota of visas for the year was exhausted within a span of less than 2 months on May 26, 2006[9], well before the beginning of the financial year concerned. The additional 20,000 Advanced Degree H-1B visas were exhausted on July 26. For FY 2008, the entire quota was exhausted before the end of the first day on which applications were accepted, April 2[10]. Under USCIS rules, the 123,480 petitions received on April 2 and April 3 that were subject to the cap were pooled, and then 65,000 of these were selected at random for further processing[11]. The additional 20,000 Advanced Degree H-1B visas for FY 2008 was exhausted on April 30.
In its annual report on H-1B visas released in November 2006, USCIS stated that it approved 131,000 H-1B visas in FY 2004 and 117,000 in FY 2005. The inflation in numbers is because H-1B visas can be exempt from the caps if the employer is a University or Research Lab.
For FY 2009, USCIS announced on April 8, 2008 that the entire quota for visas for the year has been reached, for both 20,000 Advanced and the 65,000 quota. USCIS would complete initial data entry for all filing received during April 1 to April 7, 2008 before running the lottery [12].
Effective November 28th, 2009, Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands will not be subjective to numerical limits on H-1B visa applications.

Recent H-1B legislation requires certain employers, called H-1B dependent employers to advertise positions in the USA before petitioning to employ H-1B workers for those positions.
For firms of 50 employees, an H-1B dependent employer is defined as having more than 15% of their employees in H-1B status. Smaller firms are allowed to have a higher percentage of H-1B employees before becoming 'dependent'.

The H-1B program has caused a number of criticisms.
Nobel Prize winning economist Milton Friedman called the program a corporate subsidy, as quoted in a 2002 article in Computerworld. [13] The accuracy of this quote can not be ascertained, however, as Mr. Friedman has since passed away. Others holding this view include Dr. Norman Matloff, who testified to the U.S. House Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on Immigration on the H-1B subject. Matloff's paper for the University of Michigan Journal of Law Reform claims that there has been no shortage of qualified American citizens to fill American computer-related jobs, and that the data offered as evidence of American corporations needing H-1B visas to address labor shortages was erroneous. [14] The United States General Accounting Office found in a report in 2000 that controls on the H-1B program lacked effectiveness. [15] The GAO report's recommendations were subsequenty implemented.
One criticism of the H-1B program has been its role in replacing U.S. workers. The first documented cases occurred in 1994 when AIG (Livington NJ) and SeaLand (Elizabeth NJ), took advantage of a loophole in the law to replace their U.S. programming staffs with H-1B workers. These companies used contract job shops to supply H-1B replacements. The companies could claim they did not apply for H-1B visas, and the job shops could claim they had not fired any U.S. workers. Thus, the employer could openly and legally replace its U.S. workforce with H-1B workers.
The American Competitiveness Act of 1998 that temporarily expanded the H-1B program contained a provision that was alleged to close this loophole in the version that passed the House Judiciary Committee. The House leadership had it removed before the bill came to a vote. Critics of the H-1B program suggest that because demand for US immigration rights is so great, such provisions are difficult to enforce.
Another criticism of the H-1B program is its vague eligibility requirements, but specific guidelines, upheld by a body of case law, define the requirements. While frequently described as a program for highly skilled workers, the H-1B nonimmigrant visa category specifically applies to specialty occupations. It can be argued that any job that requires a minimum of a bachelor's degree is "highly skilled".
Specialty occupations have been defined as positions that require theoretical or technical expertise in a specialized field and have generally been interpreted as being those that normally require the attainment of a Bachelor's degree. [16] Typical H-1B occupations include architects, engineers, computer programmers, accountants, doctors, business managers, and college professors. The H-1B visa program also includes fashion models.
Wage depression is a complaint critics have about the H-1B program: some studies have found that H-1B workers are paid significantly less than U.S. workers.[17][18] It is claimed that the H-1B program is primarily used as a source of cheap labor. These studies are often conducted and reported by special interest groups that oppose the H-1B program, however. No definitive governmental study, either by the Government Accounting Office or the Congressional Research Agency has proven these statistics to be true. A paper by Harvard Professor George J. Borjas for the National Bureau of Economic Research found that "a 10 percent immigration-induced increase in the supply of doctorates lowers the wage of competing workers by about 3 to 4 percent."
The Labor Condition Application (LCA) included in the H-1B petition is supposed to ensure that H-1B workers are paid the prevailing wage in the labor market, or the employer's actual average wage (whichever is higher), but evidence exists that some employers do not abide by these provisions and avoid paying the actual prevailing wage. However, studies show that the majority of employers do pay prevailing wages and the law provides stiff penalties for abusers.[citation needed]
DOL has split the prevailing wage into four levels, with Level One representing about the 17th percentile of wage average Americans earn. About 80 percent of LCAs are filed at this 17th percentile level[citation needed]. This four-level prevailing wage can be obtained the DOL website, [19] and is generally far lower than average wages[citation needed].
The "prevailing wage" stipulation is allegedly vague and thus easy to manipulate, resulting in employers underpaying visa workers. According to Ron Hira, assistant professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology, the median wage in 2005 for new H-1B information technology (IT) was just $50,000, which is even lower than starting wages for IT graduates with a B.S. degree. The U.S. government OES office's data indicates that 90 percent of H-1B IT wages were below the median U.S. wage for the same occupation. [5]
Historically, H-1B holders have sometimes been described as indentured servants, and while the comparison is not accurate, it had some validity prior to the passage of American Competitiveness in the Twenty-First Century Act of 2000. Although immigration generally requires short- and long-term visitors to disavow any ambition to seek the green card (permanent residency), H-1B visa holders are an important exception, in that the H-1B is legally acknowledged as a possible step towards a green card under what is called the doctrine of dual intent.
Some visa holders work offsite for major U.S. corporations, sending and coordinating work back in their homeland; for example, at large IT corporations that require someone in-house to answer questions and deal with software bugs. Corporations have been using this service for a few years, with varied success. Software offshoring was very popular for a few years and still remains an alternative for software development. The popularity has fallen off since the results have not always proven worthwhile. Communication can be difficult with offshore companies due to distance, time zones, educational, cultural, and language differences. The result can fall short of satisfying U.S specifications and more expensive in time and money than having software developed on-site.[citation needed]
H-1B visa holders may be sponsored for their green cards by their employers through an Application for Alien Labor Certification, filed with the U.S. Department of Labor. In the past, the sponsorship process has taken several years, and for much of that time the H-1B visa holder was unable to change jobs without losing their place in line for the green card. This created an element of enforced loyalty to an employer by an H-1B visa holder. Critics alleged that employers benefit from this enforced loyalty because it reduced the risk that the H-1B employee might leave the job and go work for a competitor, and that it put citizen workers at a disadvantage in the job market, since the employer has less assurance that the citizen will stay at his job for an extended period of time, especially if the work conditions are tough, wages are lower or the work is difficult or complex. It has been argued that this makes the H-1B program extremely attractive to employers, and that labor legislation in this regard has been influenced by corporations seeking and benefitting from such advantages.
Employers cannot typically sue employees if they leave their employment, regardless of whether the employee is an H-1B holder, a permanent resident or a U.S. citizen. Although any employer can make this threat, the case history of employers who have attempted to sue or otherwise claim money from H-1B employees is limited. In 2001, San Mateo County Superior Court Judge Phrasel Shelton ruled in an H-1B employee's favor on the unfair-competition statute and ordered the employer to drop restrictive language in its employee contracts. The H-1B employee in the case was awarded over $200,000 in fees and damages.[20] In 2002 the employer appealed the decision and lost.[21] In addition, Department of Labor's H-1B regulations issued in 2001 prohibit employers from making an H-1B employee pay a penalty for quitting prior to an agreed-upon date.
Some recent news reports suggest that the recession started in 2008 will exacerbate the H-1B visa situation, both for supporters of the program and for those who oppose it.[22]

In 2002, The U.S. government began an investigation into Sun Microsystems' hiring practices after an ex-employee, Guy Santiglia, filed complaints with the U.S. Department of Justice and U.S. Department of Labor alleging that the Santa Clara firm discriminates against American citizens in favor of foreign workers on H-1B visas. Santiglia accused the company of bias against U.S. citizens when it laid off 3,900 workers in late 2001 and at the same time applied for thousands of visas. In 2002, about 5 percent of Sun's 39,000 employees had temporary work visas, he said. [23] In 2005, it was decided that Sun violated only minor requirements and that neither of these violations was substantial or willful. Thus, the judge only ordered Sun to change its posting practices.[24]
For the special case of companies deemed "H-1B dependent", current U.S. law states that employers who hire foreign workers must "attest" (though for H-1B, no formal proof of any kind is required) that there are no domestic workers who could fill their positions. H-1B Visa critics have argued that this is a subjective measure that an employer can change arbitrarily and retroactively to disqualify any U.S. applicant over H-1B applicants after the fact. For instance, if a company wants to hire a particular H-1B applicant over a U.S. citizen for a reason unrelated to skills, all that is necessary is to make up an arbitrary excuse retroactively when filing the H-1B petition, whether or not the U.S. applicant is really qualified. Contrariwise, it is claimed that a requirement to show specific skills (generally measured in years of experience) would prevent employers from exercising judgment based on interview performance, fit for the team, or other legitimate work criteria. Therefore, a requirement to justify each hiring decision to a government agency would in effect discourage hiring H-1B workers even when American candidates are not equally qualified for the position.


In most states, H-1B workers and their dependents do not qualify f
