Egalitarianism
Egalitarianism (derived from the French word 챕gal, meaning equal) or Equalism is a political doctrine that holds that all people should be treated as equals and have the same political, economic, social, and civil rights.[1] Generally it applies to being held equal under the law and society at large. In actual practice, one may be considered an egalitarian in most areas listed below, even if not subscribing to equality in every possible area of individual difference.

Egalitarianism is considered by some a protean doctrine; as a social philosophy it has been applied to society in a wide variety of different ways. Common forms of egalitarianism include economic egalitarianism, legal egalitarianism, luck egalitarianism, political egalitarianism, gender egalitarianism, racial equality, asset-based egalitarianism, and Christian egalitarianism.

Egalitarianism with regard to the doctrine of grace is taught throughout the Bible, penned as early as 1,447 B.C.. In both the Tanakh and New Testament, repeated reference is made to the doctrine that "God is no respecter of persons" (Acts 10:34). Ancient Israel was given a system of laws which outlined a basis for human rights that was egalitarian at its core: "Ye shall not respect persons in judgment...." (Deuteronomy 1:17), probably intended as a type of the economy of grace by which God deals with His subjects.

The framers of various modern governments made references to the Bible doctrine of egalitarianism in the moral principles by which they lived, and which formed the basis for their legacy.[citation needed]

At a cultural level, egalitarian theories have developed in sophistication and acceptance during the past two hundred years. Among the notable broadly egalitarian philosophies are Socialism, Communism, Anarchism, Left-Libertarianism, Progressivism, and Human Rights, which promote economic, political, and legal egalitarianism, respectively. Several egalitarian ideas enjoy wide support among intellectuals and in the general populations of many countries. Whether any of these ideas have been significantly implemented in practice, however, remains a controversial question. For instance, some argue that modern representative democracy is a realization of political egalitarianism, while others believe that, in reality, most political power still resides in the hands of a ruling class, rather than in the hands of the people.

Different kinds of egalitarianism can sometimes conflict, while in other situations they may be indispensable to each other. For instance, communism is a materialistically egalitarian doctrine, according to which everyone is supposed to enjoy equality with regard to material prosperity.[citation needed] However, because material inequality has always existed to some extent in domestic and international economy, communists argue that something must be done to remove it. Since those who enjoy the greatest material wealth are not likely to wish to part with it, some form of coercive mechanism is often used.

A study of American college students published in Nature showed that people are willing to pay to reduce inequality.[2] When subjects were placed into groups and given random amounts of income, they spent their own money to reduce the incomes of the highest earners and increase the incomes of the lowest earners.[3][4]
In a follow-up study, Swiss children showed a significant increase in sharing between the ages of 3 and 8. It has not been determined whether the results of either of these experiments are due to an innate instinct, or exposure to and adoption of the customs of other people.[5]

A society that meets the meritocratic goal of equal opportunity might still be a harsh environment for those who lack the physical or mental capabilities to compete. It has been argued that policies that go beyond the meritocratic ideals are ineffective. [6]
Various other anti-egalitarian views have been brought forward, among others in the discussion on the distribution of income. To the contrary, John Rawls has argued that the welfare of a society depends on the welfare of the worst-off individual because society is better off if one improves the welfare of others.[7]
Moreover, research shows that lower inequality (i.e. high egalitarianism) is correlated with better environmental maintenance and a higher quality of life [8]. Minnesota, the most egalitarian state, ranked seventh in the country in the strength of its environmental policies, eleventh in environmental quality, and had the fourth lowest premature death rate. By contrast, Mississippi, the most inegalitarian state, ranked 46th in environmental policy, 42nd in environmental quality, and 49th in its premature death rate[9].


Article 1: Freedom, Egalitarianism, Dignity and Brotherhood
Article 2: Universality of rights
Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination졖 Article 3: Right to life, liberty and security of person졖 Article 4: Freedom from slavery졖 Article 5: Freedom from torture and cruel and unusual punishment졖 Article 6: Right to personhood졖 Article 7: Equality before the law졖 Article 8: Right to effective remedy from the law졖 Article 9: Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and exile졖 Article 10: Right to a fair trial졖 Article 11.1: Presumption of innocence졖 Article 11.2: Prohibition of retrospective law졖 Article 12: Right to privacy졖 Article 13: Freedom of movement졖 Article 14: Right of asylum졖 Article 15: Right to a nationality졖 Article 16: Right to marriage and family life졖 Article 17: Right to property졖 Article 18: Freedom of thought, conscience and religion졖 Article 19: Freedom of opinion and expression졖 Article 20.1: Freedom of assembly졖 Article 20.2: Freedom of association졖 Article 21.1: Right to participation in government졖 Article 21.2: Right of equal access to public office졖 Article 21.3: Right to universal suffrage
Article 1 and 2: Right to freedom from discrimination졖 Article 22: Right to social security졖 Article 23.1: Right to work졖 Article 23.2: Right to equal pay for equal work졖 Article 23.3: Right to just remuneration졖 Article 23.4: Right to join a trade union졖 Article 24: Right to rest and leisure졖 Article 25.1: Right to an adequate standard of living졖 Article 25.2: Right to special care and assistance for mothers and children졖 Article 26.1: Right to education졖 Article 26.2: Human rights education졖 Article 26.3: Right to choice of education졖 Article 27.1: Right to participate in culture졖 Article 27.2: Right to intellectual property
Article 28: Social order졖 Article 29.1: Social responsibility 졖 Article 29.2: Limitations of human rights졖 Article 29.3: The supremacy of the purposes and principles of the United Nations
Article 30: Nothing in this Declaration may be interpreted as implying for any State, group or person any right to engage in any activity or to perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights and freedoms set forth herein.


