Third Way (centrism)
The Third Way is a term that has been used to describe a variety of political philosophies of governance that embrace a mix of market and interventionist philosophies. Third Way approaches are commonly viewed as representing a centrist compromise between capitalism and socialism, or between market liberalism and democratic socialism. However, proponents of third way philosophies often claim that the third way represents a synthesis of these competing viewpoints, distinct from and superior to both of its sources, rather than simply a compromise or mixture.[1] This claim is embodied in the alternative description of the Third Way as the Radical center.
Past invocations of a political 'third way', in this sense, have included the Fabian Socialism, Distributism, Keynesian economics, Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal, and Harold Macmillan's 1950s One Nation Conservatism.[2] A "Third Way" approach has been adopted by social liberals and some social democrats in many Western liberal democracies.[3]
Third Way policies were enacted in the 1980s in Australia by the Hawke/Keating Labor governments.[4] The most recent prominent examples are the Obama[5] and Clinton Administrations in the United States as well as presidential candidate Hillary Clinton,[6] the Labour Party (New Labour) governments of the United Kingdom under Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, the Liberal Party government of Canada under Jean Chrétien and Paul Martin, the Australian Labor Party under Kevin Rudd, the Polder Model in The Netherlands and the Democratic Party - demokraci.pl in Poland.
The Third Way rejects both socialism and laissez-faire approaches to economic governance, but chiefly stresses technological development, education, and competitive mechanisms to pursue economic progress and governmental objectives.[7] One of its central aims is to protect the modern welfare state through reforms that maintain its economic integrity.[8]
The third way has been criticized by some conservatives and libertarians who advocate laissez-faire capitalism.[9] It has also been heavily criticized by many social democrats and democratic socialists in particular as a betrayal of left-wing values. The third way policies differ considerably between Europe and America, in America the third way refers to significantly more right-wing and laissez-faire policies than in Europe.

The term "Third Way" has been used to explain a variety of political policies and ideology in the last few centuries. These ideas were implemented by both progressives and fascists in the early 20th century.[10] The Third Way philosophy was extended in the 1950s by German ordoliberal economists such as Wilhelm Röpke, resulting in the development of the concept of the social market economy. Most significantly, Harold Macmillan, British Prime Minister from 1957 to 1963, based his philosophy of government on what he entitled in a book, The Middle Way (1938).

The term was later used by politicians in the 1990s who wished to incorporate Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan's projects of economic deregulation, privatization, and globalization into the mainstream centre-left political parties (following the crisis of socialism after the fall of the Berlin Wall).
In the last decade the Third Way can be defined as:
"something different and distinct from liberal capitalism with its unswerving belief in the merits of the free market and democratic socialism with its demand management and obsession with the state. The Third Way is in favour of growth, entrepreneurship, enterprise and wealth creation but it is also in favour of greater social justice and it sees the state playing a major role in bringing this about. So in the words of... Anthony Giddens of the LSE the Third Way rejects top down socialism as it rejects traditional neo liberalism."
– Report from the BBC, 1999[11]
A leading defender of the spread of Third Way influence in modern democracies has been British sociologist Anthony Giddens. Giddens regularly expounds on Third Way philosophy through contributions to progressive policy think tank Policy Network.


Under the centre-left Australian Labor Party from 1983 to 1996, the Bob Hawke and Paul Keating governments pursued many economic policies associated with economic rationalism, such as floating the Australian Dollar in 1983, reductions in trade tariffs, taxation reforms, changing from centralised wage-fixing to enterprise bargaining, the privatisation of Qantas and Commonwealth Bank, and deregulating the banking system. Keating also proposed a Goods and Services Tax (GST) in 1985, however due to its unpopularity amongst Labor as well as the electorate, was scrapped. The party also desisted from other reforms, such as wholesale labour market deregulation (e.g., WorkChoices), the eventual GST, the privatisation of Telstra and welfare reform including "work for the dole", which John Howard and the Liberal Party of Australia were to initiate after winning office in 1996.
Various ideological beliefs were factionalised under reforms to the ALP under Gough Whitlam, resulting in what is now known as the Socialist Left who tend to favour a more interventionist economic policy and more socially progressive ideals, and Labor Right, the now dominant faction that tends to be more economically liberal and focus to a lesser extent on social issues. The Whitlam government was first to use the term economic rationalism.[12] The Gough Whitlam Labor government from 1972 to 1975 changed from a democratic socialism platform to social democracy, their precursor to the party's "Third Way" policies. Under the Whitlam government, tariffs across the board were cut by 25 percent after 23 years of Labor being in opposition.[13]
Labor Prime Minister Kevin Rudd's first speech to parliament in 1998 stated:
Competitive markets are massive and generally efficient generators of economic wealth. They must therefore have a central place in the management of the economy. But markets sometimes fail, requiring direct government intervention through instruments such as industry policy. There are also areas where the public good dictates that there should be no market at all. We are not afraid of a vision in the Labor Party, but nor are we afraid of doing the hard policy yards necessary to turn that vision into reality. Parties of the Centre Left around the world are wrestling with a similar challenge—the creation of a competitive economy while advancing the overriding imperative of a just society. Some call this the `third way'. The nomenclature is unimportant. What is important is that it is a repudiation of Thatcherism and its Australian derivatives represented opposite. It is in fact a new formulation of the nation's economic and social imperatives.[14]
Rudd is critical of free market economists such as Friedrich Hayek,[15] although Rudd describes himself as "basically a conservative when it comes to questions of public financial management", pointing to his slashing of public service jobs as a Queensland governmental advisor.[16] 
In Canada following the election of Jean Chrétien and the Liberal Party of Canada in 1993 the new government became focused on debt and deficit reduction, leading to a fiscally conservative agenda cutting billions of dollars from provincial transfer payments and other areas of government funding. The Liberals managed to eliminate a C$42 billion deficit and pay down 36 billion dollars in debt. However, these steep funding cuts led to cuts to some social programs such as Katimavik, reduced resources for the Canadian military, and charges by the provinces and municipalities of federal downloading, typified by a significant increase in wait times for medical services (a provincial responsibility).
Unlike previous Liberal governments in the late 20th century, the Chrétien government pursued corporate tax cuts and the expansion of "free trade", leading to the negotiation of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994. As of 2007 the Liberal Party of Canada still advocates a social liberal agenda based on balanced budgets, support for globalization and fiscal "moderation".
Canada's largest leftwing party, the New Democratic Party (NDP) has also experimented with the so called "Third Way" at various times. During the government of Roy Romanow in the province of Saskatchewan from 1991–2003 the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party broke with its socialist past and followed a very conservative agenda with the goal of reducing the province's debt. This was characterized by a program of hospital closures, program cuts and privatization. Romanow would later claim to be a "disciple" of the "Third Way" ideology of Tony Blair (even though he had been in power for five and a half years before Blair's first election win). Romanow would also quip that he was a supporter of Blair's Third Way concept before it even existed.
The Province of Ontario's only NDP premier Bob Rae also followed a very fiscally conservative agenda during his government (1990-1995). Ontario was experiencing its worst recession since the Great Depression when Bob Rae was elected into office. After 1991 the government introduced budget cutbacks, reopened collective bargaining agreements with the public sector unions (the "Social Contract") and put a cap on enrollment into medical schools.[17] The Social Contract which imposed a wage freeze on public sector workers and forced them to take ten days off per year without pay (Rae Days) led to a split between the Ontario New Democratic Party and their historic allies, the labour unions (the Ontario Public Service Employees Union and the Canadian Auto Workers).[18]
Bob Rae also failed to deliver on one of his key campaign promises of introducing public auto insurance drawing intense criticism from the leftwing of his own party. In 1995 the NDP went down to an historic defeat at the hands of the province's Progressive Conservatives led by Mike Harris. In spite of the improving electoral fortunes of the federal NDP in the province of Ontario, the Ontario NDP has yet to make any significant gains. In 2002 Bob Rae wrote a piece to one of Canada's most rightwing newspapers, the National Post entitled "Parting Company with the NDP" where he criticized the party for rejecting the "third way" of Tony Blair and opposing globalization. The Ontario NDP has also thoroughly washed its hands of Bob Rae and recommitted itself to social democracy, with leader Howard Hampton citing the policies of the Swedish Social Democrats as reflecting his own beliefs. In 2006 Bob Rae joined the Liberal Party of Canada and ran for the party's leadership, coming in third. He has since been elected as a Liberal, representing Toronto Centre, in the March 2008 by-election.
After declining fortunes in the early 1990s the federal NDP also followed a more centrist agenda under leader Alexa McDonough leading NDP members and supporters including Canadian Auto Workers president Buzz Hargrove to call for her resignation. After two modest election results the NDP chose Jack Layton as its leader in 2003.[19] Layton vowed never to move the NDP into the "mushy middle". As of the 2008 election the NDP won 37 seats and 18.1% of the popular vote (their highest number of votes since 1988). This has been largely at the expense of the Liberals.

Former Prime Minister Tony Blair is cited as a Third Way politician.[20][21] According to a former Tony Blair staff member, UK Labour and Blair learnt from, and owes a debt to the Australian Bob Hawke government in the 1980s on how to govern as a 'third way' party when they took power in the 1990s.[22] Blair is a particular follower of the ideas of Anthony Giddens[23], as is current UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown.
Harold Macmillan's book The Middle Way, first published in 1938, is also written from broadly this centrist position.
Third Way policies introduced by Blair's government include the creation of Train to Gain in 2006, which offers publicly funded, flexible and specific training and education to businesses and their employees, in order to boost the success of the businesses that use it, improve the wages and career prospects of the individual employees who use it and boost the overall economy. This can be seen as simultaneously creating social justice and pursuing economic growth. Another Third Way policy introduced by New Labour includes Sure Start, which provides childcare, early education, health and family support, with an emphasis on outreach and community development, allowing mothers to go back to work and pursue their career, and providing education for young children. The New Labour government has created Academy Schools which are state-funded schools that are sponsored by a private company, faith group or charity, and have more autonomy and independence than traditional state schools and the freedom to influence the curriculum to an extent. In 1998, the New Labour government created the New Deal, which was created to reduce unemployment by providing training, subsidised employment and voluntary work to the unemployed. The New Labour government has also increased funding for apprenticeships, created adult apprenticeships for anyone over 25, and created incentives for employers to take on apprentices by providing wage subsidies for small businesses. In 2009, John Denham announced plans to create state-funded internships to help poorer university graduates get on the first rung of the career ladder.[24] The New Labour government recently created National Skills Academies, which are employer led education centres for adults, school and college leavers, graduates, employers, existing employees, new entrants to the workforce and people who are changing career. [25] They deliver skills required by key sectors and sub-sectors of the economy through working with employers. [26] Many commentators argue that the New Labour government has adopted many neoliberal and free market policies.[27] The New Labour government has created tax credits for businesses that deal in research and development.[28] Corporation tax was cut form 30% to 28% for big business in 2008.[29] The New Labour government has made many efforts to create lifelong access to learning and training.[30]
Other third way policies introduced by the New Labour government include the devolution of power to Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, as well as other localist policies, such as giving local authorities more power. Public services such as the NHS and education, have been given more autonomy and independence. Foundation hospitals are an example of devolved hospitals within the NHS. Patients can ask their GP to refer them to a specialist at any Foundation Hospital in the UK.[31] Third way policies have been seen as part of an ambitious attempt to reframe social citizenship in order to create a centre-left political grouping which can command majorities in the UK's 'first-past-the-post' electoral system.[32]

In the United States, Third Way adherents emphasize fiscal conservatism, some replacement of welfare with workfare, and a stronger preference for market solutions to traditional problems (as in pollution markets), while rejecting pure laissez-faire economics and other libertarian positions. The Third Way style of governing was firmly adopted and partly redefined during the Administration of President Bill Clinton.[33]
After Tony Blair came to power in the UK, Clinton, Blair and other leading Third Way adherents organized conferences to promote the Third Way in 1997 at Chequers in England.[34
