Scottish English
Scottish English refers to the varieties of English spoken in Scotland. It may or may not include Scots depending on the observer.[1]
The main, formal variety is called Scottish Standard English[2][3] or Standard Scottish English.[4][5] The register normally used in formal, non-fiction writing follows Standard English in spelling and grammar. However, Scottish English does have some distinctive vocabulary, particularly pertaining to Scottish institutions such as the Church of Scotland, local government and the education and legal systems.
Scottish Standard English is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum, with focused broad Scots at the other.[citation needed] Scottish English may be influenced to varying degrees by Scots.[6][7] Many Scots speakers separate Scots and Scottish English as different registers depending on social circumstances.[citation needed] Some speakers code switch clearly from one to the other while others style shift in a less predictable and more fluctuating manner.[citation needed] Generally there is a shift to Scottish English in formal situations or with individuals of a higher social status.[8]

Scottish English is the result of dialect contact between Scots and English after the 17th century. The resulting shift to English by Scots-speakers resulted in many phonological compromises and lexical transfers, often mistaken for mergers by linguists unfamiliar with the history of Scottish English (Macafee, 2004). Furthermore, the process was also influenced by interdialectal forms, hypercorrections and spelling pronunciations.[citation needed] (See Phonology below.)

The speech of the middle classes in Scotland tends to conform to the grammatical norms of the written standard, particularly in situations that are regarded as formal. Highland English is slightly different from the variety spoken in the Lowlands in that it is more phonologically, grammatically, and lexically influenced by a Gaelic substratum.
While pronunciation features vary among speakers (depending on region and social status), there are a number of phonological aspects characteristic of Scottish English:

Scotticisms are idioms or expressions which are characteristic of Scots.[12] They are more likely to occur in spoken than written language.[citation needed]
Scotticisms are generally divided into two types:[13][page†needed] covert Scotticisms, which generally go unnoticed as being particularly Scottish by those using them, and overt Scotticisms, usually used for stylistic effect, with those using them aware of their Scottish nature.

Scottish English has inherited a number of lexical items from Scots which are comparatively rare in other forms of standard English.[citation needed]
General items are outwith, meaning "outside of"; wee, the Scots word for small (also common in New Zealand English); pinkie for little finger and janitor for caretaker (pinkie and janitor are standard in American English). Examples of culturally specific items are caber, haggis, and landward for rural; It's your shot for "It's your turn"; Youse, as the plural of you.
The use of "How?" meaning "Why?" is distinctive of Scottish, Northern English and Northern Irish English.
There is a range of (often anglicised) legal and administrative vocabulary e.g., depute /Ààd…õpjut/ for deputy, proven /ÀàproÀêv…ôn/ for proved (standard in American English), interdict for injunction and sheriff substitute for acting sheriff.
Often, lexical differences between Scottish English and Southern Standard English are simply differences in the distribution of shared lexis, such as stay for "live" (as in: where do you stay?); doubt for "think the worst" (I doubt it will rain meaning "I fear that it will rain" instead of the standard English meaning "I think it unlikely that it will rain").

The progressive verb forms are used rather more frequently than in other varieties of standard English, for example with some stative verbs (I'm wanting a drink). The future progressive frequently implies an assumption (You'll be coming from Glasgow). Prepositions are often used differently. The compound preposition off of is often used (Take that off of the table).
In colloquial speech shall and ought are wanting, must is marginal for obligation and may is rare. Many syntactical features of SSE are found in other forms of English, e.g. English language in England and North American English:
Note that in Scottish English, the first person declarative I amn't invited and interrogative Amn't I invited? are both possible. Contrast English language in England, which has Aren't I? but no contracted declarative form. (All varieties have I'm not invited.)

