Business process management
Business process management (BPM) is a field of management focused on aligning organizations with the wants and needs of clients. It is a holistic management approach[citation needed] that promotes business effectiveness and efficiency while striving for innovation, flexibility and integration with technology. Business process management attempts to continuously improve processes. It could therefore be described as a "process optimization process".

A business process is "a collection of related, structured activities that produce a service or product that meet the needs of a client."[citation needed] These processes are critical to any organization as they generate revenue and often represent a significant proportion of costs. BPM articles and pundits often discuss BPM from one of two viewpoints: people and technology.
Roughly speaking, the idea of (business) process is as traditional as concepts of tasks, department, production, outputs. The current management and improvement approach, with formal definitions and technical modeling, has been around since the early 1990s (see business process modeling). However there has been a common confusion in the IT community, as the term 'business process' is often used as synonymous of management of middleware processes; or integrating application software tasks. This viewpoint may be overly restrictive. This should be kept in mind when reading software engineering papers which refer to 'business processes' or 'business process modeling.'
Although the initial focus of BPM was on the automation of mechanistic business processes, it has since been extended to integrate human-driven processes in which human interaction takes place in series or parallel with the mechanistic processes. A common form is where individual steps in the business process which require human intuition or judgment to be performed are assigned to the appropriate members of an organization (as with workflow systems).
More advanced forms such as human interaction management are in the complex interaction between human workers in performing a workgroup task. In this case many people and systems interact in structured, ad-hoc, and sometimes completely dynamic ways to complete one to many transactions.
BPM can be used to understand organizations through expanded views that would not otherwise be available to organize and present. These views include the relationships of processes to each other which, when included in the process model, provide for advanced reporting and analysis that would not otherwise be available. BPM is regarded by some as the backbone of enterprise content management.


Business Process Management, or BPM, broadly speaking, is part of management approach that is now several decades old. BPM aims at improving the way business people think about and manage their businesses. Its particular manifestations, whether they are termed “work simplification,” “six sigma,” “business process reengineering,” or “business process management,” may come and go, but the underlying impulse, to shift the way managers and employees think about the organization of business, continues to evolve.
The place to begin is with an overview of the world of business process change technologies and methodologies. In essence, there are three major process traditions: the management tradition, the quality control tradition, and the IT tradition. Too often individuals who come from one tradition are inclined to ignore or depreciate the other approaches, feeling that their approach is sufficient or superior. Today, however, the tendency is for three traditions to merging into a more comprehensive BPM tradition.
One could easily argue that each of the three traditions has roots that go right back to ancient times. Managers have always tried to make workers more productive, there have always been efforts to simplify processes and to control the quality of outputs, and, if IT is regarded as an instance of technology, then people have been trying to use technologies of one kind or another ever since the first human picked up a stick to use as a spear or a lever. All three traditions got a huge boost from the Industrial Revolution which started to change manufacturing at the end of the 18th Century. Our concern here, however, is not with the ancient roots of these traditions but the recent developments in each field and the fact that practitioners in one field often choose to ignore the efforts of those working in other traditions.

The Quality Control tradition as a continuation of the Work Simplification tradition. The modern roots of quality control and process improvement, in the United States, at least, date from the publication, by Frederick Winslow Taylor, of Principles of Scientific Management, in 1911 (Taylor, 1911). Taylor described a set of key ideas he believed good managers should use to improve their businesses. He argued for work simplification, for time studies, for systematic experimentation to identify the best way of performing a task, and for control systems that measured and rewarded output. Taylor’s book became an international best-seller and has influenced many in the process movement. Shigeo Shingo, one of the co-developers of the Toyota Production System, describes how he first read a Japanese translation of Taylor in 1924 and the book itself in 1931 and credits it for setting the course of his work life (Shingo, 1983)
One must keep in mind, of course, the Taylor wrote immediately after Henry Ford introduced his moving production line and revolutionized how managers thought about production. The first internal-combustion automobiles were produced by Karl Benz and Gottlieb Daimler in Germany in 1885. In the decades that followed, some 50 entrepreneurs in Europe and North America set up companies to build cars. In each case, the companies built cars by hand, incorporating improvements with each model. Henry Ford was one among many who tried his hand at building cars in this manner (McGraw, 1997).
In 1903, however, Henry Ford started his third company, the Ford Motor Company, and tried a new approach to automobile manufacturing. First, he designed a car that would be of high quality, not too expensive, and easy to manufacture. Next he organized a moving production line. In essence, workmen began assembling a new automobile at one end of the factory building and completed the assembly as it reached the far end of the plant. Workers at each point along the production line had one specific task to do. One group moved the chassis into place, another welded on the side panels, and still another group lowered the engine into place when each car reached their station. In other words, Henry Ford conceptualized the development of an automobile as a single process and designed and sequenced each activity in the process to assure that the entire process ran smoothly and efficiently. Clearly Ford had thought deeply about the way cars were assembled in his earlier plants and had a very clear idea of how he could improve the process.
By organizing the process as he did, Henry Ford was able to significantly reduce the price of building automobiles. As a result, he was able to sell cars for such a modest price that he made it possible for every middle-class American to own a car. At the same time, as a direct result of the increased productivity of the assembly process, Ford was able to pay his workers more than any other auto assembly workers. Within a few years, Ford’s new approach had revolutionized the auto industry, and it soon led to changes in almost every other manufacturing process as well. This success had managers throughout the world scrambling to learn about Ford’s innovations and set the stage for the tremendous popularity of Taylor’s book which seemed to explain what lay behind Ford’s achievement.
Throughout the first half of the 20th Century, engineers worked to apply Taylor’s ideas, analyzing processes, measuring and applying statistical checks whenever they could. Ben Graham, in his book on Detail Process Charting, describes the Work Simplification movement during those years, and the annual Work Simplification conferences, sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), that were held in Lake Placid, New York (Graham, 2004). These conferences, that lasted into Sixties, were initially stimulated by a 1911 conference at on Scientific Management, held at Dartmouth College, and attended by Taylor and the various individuals who were to dominate process work in North America during the first half of the 20th Century.
The American Society for Quality (ASQ) was established in 1946 and the Work Simplification movement gradually transitioned into the Quality Control movement. In 1951, Juran’s Quality Control Handbook appeared for the first time and this magisterial book has become established at the encyclopedic source of information about the quality control movement (Juran, 1951)
In the Eighties, when US auto companies began to lose significant market share to the Japanese, many began to ask what the Japanese were doing better. The popular answer was that the Japanese had embraced an emphasis on Quality Control that they learned, ironically, from Edwards Deming, a quality guru sent to Japan by the US government in the aftermath of World War II. (Deming’s classic book is Out of the Crisis, published in 1982.) In fact, of course the story is more complex, and includes the work of native Japanese quality experts, like Shigeo Shingo and Taiichi Ohno, who were working to improve production quality well before World War II, and who joined, in the post-war period to create the Toyota Production System, and thereby became the fathers of Lean (Shiegeo, 1983; Taiichi, 1978). (The work of Shingo and Ohno work was popularized in the US by James Womack, Daniel Jones and Daniel Roos in their book The Machine That Changed the World: The story of Lean Production, 1991. This book was a commissioned study of what Japanese auto manufacturing companies were doing and introduced “lean” into the process vocabulary.) The Baldrige National Quality Awards program was established by the US Commerce Department in 1987 to encourage companies to adopt quality control techniques (www.quality.nist.gov).

In the Seventies the most popular quality control methodology was termed Total Quality Management (TQM), but in the late-Eighties it began to be superseded by Six Sigma – an approach developed at Motorola (Ramias, 2005; Barney, 2003). Six Sigma combined process analysis with statistical quality control techniques, and a program of organizational rewards and emerged as a popular approach to continuous process improvement. In 2001 the ASQ established a SIG for Six Sigma and began training black belts. Since then the quality movement has gradually been superseded, at least in the US, by the current focus on Lean and Six Sigma.
Many readers may associate Six Sigma and Lean with specific techniques, like DMAIC, Just-In-Time (JIT) delivery, or the Seven Types of Waste, but, in fact, they are just as well known for their emphasis on company-wide training efforts designed to make every employee responsible for process quality. One of the most popular executives in the US, Jack Welsh, who was CEO of General Electric when his company embraced Six Sigma, not only mandated a company-wide Six Sigma effort, but made 40% of every executive’s bonus dependent on Six Sigma results. Welch went on to claim it was the most important thing he did while he was CEO of GE. In a similar way, Lean, in its original implementation as the Toyota Production System, is a company-wide program embraced with an almost religious zeal by the CEO and by all Toyota’s managers and employees. Of all the approaches to process improvement, Lean and Six Sigma come closest, at their best, in implementing an organizational transformation that embraces process throughout the organization.
Throughout most of the Nineties, Lean and Six Sigma were offered as independent methodologies, but starting in this decade, companies have begun to combine the two methodologies and tend, increasingly, to refer to the approach as Lean Six Sigma.

An interesting example of a more specialized development in the Quality Control tradition is the development of the Capability Maturity Model (CMM) at the Software Engineering Institute (SEI) at Carnegie Mellon University. In the early Nineties, the US Defense of Department (DoD) was concerned about the quality of the software applications being delivered, and the fact that, in many cases, the software applications were incomplete and way over budget. In essence, the DoD asked Watts Humphrey and SEI to develop a way of evaluating software organizations to determine which were likely to deliver what they promised on time and within budget. Humphrey’s and his colleagues at SEI developed a model that assumed that organizations that didn’t understand their processes and that had no data about what succeeded or failed were unlike to deliver as promised. (Paulk, 1995) They studied software shops and defined a series of steps organizations went through as they become more sophisticated in managing the software process. In essence, the five steps or levels are as follows.
1.Initial – Processes aren’t defined.
2.Repeatable – Basic departmental processes are defined and are repeated more or less consistently.
3.Defined – The organization, as a whole, knows how all their processes work together and can perform them consistently.
4.Managed – Managers consistently capture data on their processes and use that data to keep processes on track.
5.Optimizing – Managers and team members continuously work to improve their processes.
Level 5, as described by CMM, is nothing less that the company-wide embrace of process quality that we see at Toyota and at GE.
Once CMM was established, SEI proceeded to gathered large amounts of information on software organizations and begin to certify organizations as being level 1, 2, etc. and the DoD began to require level 3, 4 or 5 for their software contracts. The fact that several Indian software firms were able to establish themselves as CMM Level 5 organizations is often credited with the recent, widespread movement to outsource software development to Indian companies.
Since the original SEI CMM approach was defined in 1995, it has gone through many changes. At some point there were several different models, and, recently, SEI has made an effort to pull all of the different approaches back together and have called the new version CMMI – Capability Maturity Model Integrated. At the same time, SEI has generalized the model so that CMMI extends beyond software development and can be used to describe entire companies and their overall process maturity. (Chrissis, 2007) We will consider some new developments in this approach, later, but suffice to say here that CMMI is very much in the Quality Control tradition with it emphasis on output standards and statistical measures of quality.
If one considers all of the individuals working in companies who are focused on quality control, in all its variations like Lean and Six Sigma, they surely constitute the largest body of practitioners working for process improvement today.

At this point, we’ll leave the Quality Control tradition, whose practitioners have mostly been engineers and quality control specialists, and turn to the management tradition. As with the quality control tradition, it would be easy to trace the Management Tradition to Ford and Taylor. And, as we have already suggested, there have always been executives who have been concerned with improving how their organizations functioned. By the mid-Twentieth Century however, most US managers were trained at business schools that didn’t emphasize a process approach. Most business schools are organized along functional lines, and consider Marketing, Strategy, Finance, and Operations as separate disciplines. More important, operations have not enjoyed as much attention at business schools in the past decade.
Joseph M. Juran, in an article on the United States in his Quality Control Handbook, argues that the US emerged from World War II with its production capacity in good condition while the rest of the world was in dire need of manufactured goods of all kinds. (Juran, 1951) Thus, during the 50s and 60s US companies focused on producing large quantities of goods to fulfill the demand of consumers who weren’t very concerned about quality. Having a CEO who knew about finance or marketing was often considered more important than having a CEO who knew about operations. It was only in the Eighties, when the rest of the world had caught up with the US and began to offer superior products for less cost that things began to change. As the US automakers began to lose market share to quality European and Japanese cars in the Eighties, US mangers began to refocus on operations and began to search for ways to reduce prices and improve production quality. At that point, they rediscovered, in Japan, the emphasis on process and quality that had been created in the US in the first half of the 20th Century. Unlike the quality control tradition, however, that focuses on the quality and the production of products; the management tradition has focused on the overall performance of the firm. The emphasis is on aligning strategy with the means of realizing that strategy, and on organizing and managing employees to achieve corporate goals.

The most important figure in the management tradition in the years since World War II, has been Geary Rummler, who began his career at the University of Michigan, at the very center of the US auto industry. Rummler derives his methodology from both a concern with organizations as systems and combines that with a focus on how we train, manage, and motivate employee performance. He began teaching courses at the University of Michigan in the Sixties where he emphasized the use of organization diagrams, process flowcharts to model business processes, and task analysis of jobs to determine why some employees perform better than others. Later, Rummler joined with Alan Brache to create Rummler-Brache, a company that trained large numbers of process practitioners in the Eighties and early Nineties and co-authored, with Alan Brache, one of the real classics of our field – Improving Performance: How to Manage the White Space on the Organization Chart. (Rummler, 1990) Rummler always emphasized the need to improve corporate performance, and argued that process redesign was the best way to do that. He then proceeded to argue that improving managerial and employee job performance was the key to improved processes.
Unlike the work simplification and quality control literature that was primarily read by engineers and quality control experts, Rummler’s work has always been read by business managers and human resource experts.

A second important guru in the Management tradition is Harvard Business School professor Michael Porter. Porter was already established as a leading business strategy theorist, but in his 1985 book, Competitive Advantage, he moved beyond strategic concepts, as they had been described until then, and argued that strategy was intimately linked with how companies organized their activities into value chains, which were, in turn, the basis for a company’s competitive advantage. (Porter, 1985)
A Value Chain supports a product line, a market, and its customers. If your company produces jeeps, then you have a Value Chain for jeeps. If you company makes loans, then you have a Value Chain for loans. A single company can have more than one value chain. Large international organizations typically have from 5-10 value chains. In essence, value chains are the ultimate processes that define a company. All other processes are defined by relating them to the value chain. Put another way, a single value chain can be decomposed into major operational process like Market, Sell, Produce, and Deliver and associated management support processes like Plan, Finance, HR and IT. In fact, it was Porter’s value chain concept that emphasized the distinction between core and support processes. The value chain has been the organizing principle that has let organizations define and arrange their processes and structure their process change efforts during the past two decades.
As Porter defines it, a competitive advantage refers to a situation in which one company manages to dominate an industry for a sustained period of time. An obvious example, in our time, is Wal-Mart, a company that completely dominates retail sales in the US and seems likely to continue to do so for the foreseeable future. “Ultimately,” Porter concludes, “all differences between companies in cost or price derive from the hundreds of activities required to create, produce, sell, and deliver their products or services such as calling on customers, assembling final products, and training employees…” In other words, “activities... are the basic units of competitive advantage.” This conclusion is closely related to Porter’s analysis of a value chain. A value chain consists of all the activities necessary to produce and sell a product or service. Today we would probably use the word “processes” rather than “activity,” but the point remains the same. Companies succeed because they understand what their customers will buy and proceed to generate the product or service their customers want by means of a set of activities that create, produce, sell and deliver the product or service.
So far the conclusion seems like a rather obvious conclusion, but Porter goes further. He suggests that companies rely on one of two approaches when they seek to organize and improve their activities or processes. They either rely on an approach which Porter terms “operational effectiveness” or they rely on “strategic positioning.” “Operational effectiveness,” as Porter uses the term, means performing similar activities better than rivals perform them. In essence, this is the “best practices” approach we hear so much about. Every company looks about, determines what appears to be the best way of accomplishing a given task and then seeks to implement that process in their organization. Unfortunately, according to Porter, this isn’t an effective strategy. The problem is that everyone else is also trying to implement the same best practices. Thus, everyone involved in this approach gets stuck on a treadmill, moving faster all the time, while barely managing to keep up with their competitors. Best practices don’t give a company a competitive edge – they are too easy to copy. Everyone who has observed companies investing in software systems that don’t improve productivity or price but just maintain parity with one’s competitors understands this. Worse, this approach drives profits down because more and more money is consumed in the effort to copy the best practices of competitors. If every company is relying on the same processes then no individual company is in a position to offer customers something special for which they can charge a premium. Everyone is simply engaged in an increasingly desperate struggle to be the low cost producer, and everyone is trying to get there by copying each others best practices while their margins continue to shrink. As Porter sums it up: “Few companies have competed successfully on the basis of operational effectiveness over an extended period, and staying ahead of rivals gets harder every day.”
The alternative is to focus on evolving a unique strategic position and then tailoring the company’s value chain to execute that unique strategy. “Strategic positioning,” Porter explains, “means performing different activities from rivals’ or performing similar activities in different ways.” He goes on to say that “While operational effectiveness is about achieving excellence in individual activities, or functions, strategy is about combining activities.” Indeed, Porter insists that those who take strategy seriously need to have lots of discipline, because they have to reject all kinds of options to stay focused on their strategy.
Rounding out his argument, Porter concludes “Competitive advantage grows out of the entire system of activities. The fit among activities substantially reduces cost or increases differentiation.” He goes on to warn that “Achieving fit is difficult because it requires the integration of decisions and actions across many independent subunits.” Obviously we are just providing the barest summary of Porter’s argument. In essence, however, it is a very strong argument for defining a goal and then shaping and integrating a value chain to assure that all the processes in the value chain work together to achieve the goal.
The importance of this approach, according to Porter, is derived from the fact that “Positions built on systems of activities are far more sustainable than those built on individual activities.” In other words, while rivals can usually see when you have improved a specific activity, and duplicate it, they will have a much harder time figuring out exactly how you have integrated all your processes. They will have an even harder time duplicating the management discipline required to keep the integrated whole functioning smoothly.
Porter’s work on strategy and value chains assured that most modern discussion of business strategy are also discussions of how value chains or processes will be organized. This, in turn, has led to a major concern with how a company aligns its strategic goals with its specific processes and many of the current concerns we discuss in the following pages represent efforts to address this issue.

One methodology very much in the management tradition is the Balanced Scorecard methodology developed by Robert S. Kaplan and David P. Norton. (Kaplan, 1996) Kaplan and Norton began by developing an approach to performance measurement that emphasized a scorecard that considers a variety of different metrics of success. At the same time, the Scorecard methodology proposed a way of aligning departmental measures and managerial performance evaluations in hierarchies that could systemize all of the measures undertaken in an organization. Later they linked the scorecard with a model of the firm that stressed that people make processes work, that processes generated happy customers, and that happy customers generated financial results. (Kaplan, 2004) In other words, Kaplan and Norton have created a model that begins with strategy, links that to process and people, and then, in turn, links that to measures that determine if the operations are successfully implementing the strategy.
In its initial use, the Balanced Scorecard methodology was often used by functional organizations, but there are now a number of new approaches that tie the scorecard measures directly to value chains and business processes, and process people are increasingly finding the scorecard approach a systematic way to align process measures from specific activities to strategic goals.

Another development very much in the management tradition is the Supply Chain Council and its SCOR framework. The Supply Chain Council is a consortium of some 1000 companies. Attendees at SCC conferences, who meet throughout the world each year, are almost entirely senior supply chain managers. These are individuals who are interested in how companies supply chains work and how they can be combined with the supply chains of partners and distributors to achieve maximum results and efficiencies. In 1996 the SCC began to publish information about its Supply Chain Operations Reference (SCOR) framework. The SCOR framework describes a supply chain in terms of three high level processes: Source, Make and Deliver, which it then subdivides into subprocesses. The framework defines measures for each process and subprocess and describes best practices used with each. (www.supply-chain.org)
A similar development occurred at the TeleManagement Forum, a consortium of Telecom executives. In 1997 the TMForum introduced its Telecom Operations Model (TOM), which has been extended to be the eTOM model. The business process framework provides a complete framework for all of the business processes used at a Telecom company. (www.tmforum.org)
Even more recently the Value Chain Group (VCG) has released a Value Reference Model (VRM) that provides generic processes capable of describing an entire value chain. (www.value-chain.org) The key thing to note about SCC, TMForum and VCG efforts is that they are driven by business executives who are interested in rapidly defining the processes and metrics for their organizations. In all three cases, best practices are more likely to describe management and employee practices than to consider software issues.

One can argue about where the Business Process Reengineering (BPR) movement should be placed. Some would place it in the management tradition because it motivated lots of senior executives to rethink their business strategies. The emphasis in BPR on value chains certainly derives from Porter. Others would place it in the IT tradition because it emphasized using IT to redefine work processes and automate them wherever possible. It probably sits on line between the two traditions, and we’ll consider in more detail under the IT tradition.

The third tradition involves the use of computers and software applications to automate work processes. This movement began in the late Sixties and grew rapidly in the Seventies with an emphasis on automating back office operations like book keeping and record keeping and has progressed to the automation of a wide variety of jobs, either by doing the work with computers, or by providing desktop computers to assist h
