Spirited Away
Spirited Away (千と千尋の神隠し ,Sen to Chihiro no Kamikakushi?, lit. Sen and Chihiro's Spiriting Away) is a 2001 Japanese anime film written and directed by famed animator Hayao Miyazaki and produced by Studio Ghibli. The film sees a sullen ten-year-old girl in the middle of her family's move to the suburbs wander into a world ruled by gods, witches, and monsters; where humans are changed into animals; and a bathhouse for these creatures.
The film received many awards, including the second Oscar ever awarded for Best Animated Feature, the first anime film to win an Academy Award, the first (and so far only) non-English speaking animation to win, and the only winner of that award to be traditionally animated or win among five nominees (in every other year there were three nominees). The film also won the Golden Bear at the 2002 Berlin International Film Festival (tied with Bloody Sunday). Spirited Away overtook Titanic in the Japanese box office to become the highest-grossing film in Japanese history.[1]

Chihiro and her parents are moving to a new town. While driving, her father decides to take a shortcut, but gets lost, stumbling across what appears to be an abandoned theme park. The family crosses a tunnel and explores the park, finding the stalls are full of freshly-cooked food. While Chihiro's parents are eating, Chihiro wanders off and meets a boy named Haku. Haku seems to be familiar with Chihiro and warns her urgently to escape with her parents; she returns to find her parents have turned to pigs and that the way back has become a deep river. Spirits appear and go about celebrating in the park. Haku secretly takes Chihiro to a large bathhouse, careful to avoid alerting the spirits to the presence of a human. Haku then tells her that she must get a job from the witch Yubaba, the owner of the park's bathhouse, until he can help her recover her parents and escape.
With the help of the boiler room master Kamajii and a bathhouse servant girl Lin, Chihiro is able to convince Yubaba to give her a job; in exchange, Chihiro is forced to give up her name so that Yubaba may keep her in her service forever and is subsequently given the name "Sen". Chihiro eventually learns that Haku is similarly indebted to Yubaba. Chihiro is put to work alongside Lin, helping to bathe and serve the most difficult spirits in the bathhouse. Chihiro is able to successfully bathe a "stink spirit", in fact revealed to be a river spirit, who awards Chihiro with a magic healing cake made from special herbs, as well as with gold. Later, Chihiro discovers Haku's true form, a dragon, as he is attacked by paper birds controlled by Zeniba, Yubaba's twin sister. Haku had stolen Zeniba's sigil under orders from Yubaba. Chihiro tries to help Haku recover using the cake given to her by the river spirit, which acts as an emetic to the dragon, thus recovering Zeniba's sigil, but Haku remains comatose, so Chihiro decides to travel to Zeniba's home to return the sigil, hoping to break her curse. Chihiro sets out on a lonely train ride across the spirit world, along with a wraith-like spirit called No Face who terrorized the bathhouse and tried to earn the affection of Chihiro and Boh, Yubaba's gigantic infant son, whom Zeniba has transformed into a mouse.
The group arrives at Zeniba's house to find that Zeniba is friendlier than expected, and that the curse on Haku was placed on him by Yubaba, but Chihiro's love and caring has broken the spell. Zeniba makes Chihiro a special hairband to show her that her friends are with her, as well as for protection, and No Face is offered to stay at Zeniba's home as her assistant. Haku, now recovered, shows up to return Chihiro to the bathhouse, explaining that Yubaba will return Chihiro's parents to normal and allow all three of them to leave in exchange for returning Boh. As they travel on Haku's dragon form, Chihiro realizes that Haku is the same river spirit that saved her as a small child when she fell into the Kohaku River, and the realization helps to break Yubaba's control on Haku completely. At the bathhouse, Yubaba reveals that Chihiro must pass one more task as part of Haku's deal: identify which pigs out of several are her parents. Chihiro passes the test, and Yubaba is forced to let her and her family go. Haku escorts her to the entrance of the spirit world, telling her that her parents are waiting on the other side, but to not look back or else the deal will be broken. Chihiro rejoins her parents, not once looking back; the family returns to their car, now dusty, to continue to their new home. Zeniba's hairband is still in Chihiro's hair.


The major themes of Spirited Away center on the protagonist Chihiro and her liminal journey through the realm of the bathhouse of the gods. A spoiled child, forced into the fantastic world, Chihiro becomes completely separated from everything she has known and must find her way back into reality. Chihiro’s experience in the alternate world, frequently compared to Lewis Carroll’s Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, represents her passage from childhood to adulthood.[2] The archetypal entrance into another world clearly demarcates Chihiro’s status as one in-between. In her transition between child and adult, Chihiro stands outside of these societal boundaries, a situation mirrored by the supernatural setting outside of reality. The use of the word kamikakushi, literally hidden by gods, within the Japanese title, and its associated folklore reinforces this liminal passage: “Kamikakushi is a verdict of ‘social death’ in this world, and coming back to this world from Kamikakushi meant ‘social resurrection.’”[3] Upon gaining employment at the bathhouse, Yubaba’s seizure of Chihiro’s true name, a common theme within folklore, symbolically kills the child Chihiro.[4] Having lost her childhood identity, Chihiro can not return to reality the way she came, she can only move forward into adulthood. The following trials and obstacles Chihiro must overcome become the challenges and lessons common in rites-of-passage, and the monomyth format. In her attempt to regain her self, her “continuity with her past,” Chihiro must forge a new identity.[5]
Beneath the surface coming-of-age trope, Spirited Away contains critical commentary on modern Japanese society concerning generational conflicts, the struggle with dissolving traditional culture and customs within a global society, and environmental pollution [6]. Chihiro, as a representation of the liminal shōjo, “may be seen as a metaphor for the Japanese society which, over the last decade, seems to be increasingly in limbo, drifting uneasily away from the values and ideological framework of the immediate postwar era.” [7] Just as Chihiro seeks her past identity, Japan, in its anxiety over the economic downturn occurring during the release of Spirited Away in 2001, sought to reconnect to past values [8]. In interview, Miyazaki has commented on this nostalgic element for an old Japan[9]. Initially, Chihiro travels past the abandoned fair ground, a symbol for Japan’s burst “bubble economy,” and her parent’s credit card fueled gluttony and transformation into pigs, to reach the fantasy world replete with Japanese culture and fable in the amalgam of the bathhouse.
However, the “bathhouse of the spirits has its own ambivalence, and its own darkness…. Miyazaki is not so simpleminded as to locate a perfect vision in the past or the spiritual.” [10] Many of the employees are rude and discriminating to Chihiro, and the corruption of avarice has incorporated itself into the “bricolage” of the bathhouse [11] as a place of “excess and greed” as well, as depicted in the initial appearance of the No-Face. [12] . In stark contrast to the “archetypal approaches to cultural recovery such as recognition, proper identification, spiritual cleansing, and sacrifice,” embodied in Chihiro’s journey and transformation, the constant background presence of the ambiguity of the bathhouse reminds the audience that reality is not so simple: “the bathhouse’s simultaneous incorporation of the carnivalesque and the chaotic suggests that the threats to the collectivity are not simply outside ones.” [13] The environmental asides concerning the trash deforming the Stink-god and Haku’s plight over the loss of his river to apartment complexes, further indicate that the sources of pollution within the bathhouse, a place of ritual purity, come from within the Japanese society.

Spirited Away was directed and written by Hayao Miyazaki. Every summer, Miyazaki spent his vacation at a mountain cabin with his family and five young female friends. He wanted to make a film for them, and that is how Spirited Away came about. Miyazaki had previously done films such as My Neighbor Totoro and Kiki's Delivery Service, which were for small children and teenagers, but he had not done a film for ten-year-old girls. For inspiration, he read shōjo manga magazines such as Nakayoshi and Ribon that the girls had left at the cabin. When Miyazaki read the magazines he felt that they only offered things such as crushes and romance. When looking at his young friends, Miyazaki felt this was not what they "held dear in their hearts", so instead he decided to make the film about a girl heroine that they could look up to.[14]
Miyazaki had wanted to make a new film for a long time. He had previously written two project proposals, but they had both been rejected. The first one was based on the Japanese book Kirino Mukouno Fushigina Machi, and the second one was about a teenage heroine. Miyazaki's third proposal, which ended up becoming Spirited Away, was more successful. All three stories revolves around a bathhouse that was based on a bathhouse in Miyazaki's hometown. Miyazaki thought the bathhouse was a mysterious place, and there was a small door next to one of the bathtubs in the bathhouse. Miyazaki was always curious to what was behind it, and he made up several stories about it; one of which was the inspiration for the bathhouse in Spirited Away.[14]
The film went into production in 2000, with a budget of 1.9 billion yen (15 million dollars). In his previous film, Princess Mononoke, Miyazaki and his staff had experimented with the process of computer animation. Equipping themselves with more computers and programs like 3D, the Studio Ghibli staff began to learn the software, but keeping the technology at a level to enhance the story, not "steal the show". All the characters were largely animated by hand, with Miyazaki working alongside his animators to see that they were getting it just right.[15] The biggest difficulty in making the film was to cut its length down. When production started, Miyazaki realized that it would be more than three hours long if he made it according to his plot. He had to cut many scenes from the story, and tried to reduce the "eye-candy" in the film because he wanted it to be simple. Miyazaki did not want to make the heroine a pretty girl. At the beginning, he was frustrated that she looked "dull" and thought, "She isn't cute. Isn't there something we can do?". As the film neared the end, however, he was relieved to feel that "she will be a charming woman".[14]
