Education in Germany
Responsibility for German education system lies primarily with the Bundesländer (states) while the federal government only has a minor role. Optional kindergarten education is provided for all children between three and six years old, after which school attendance is compulsory for mostly 11 to 12 years. In the first nine years all students attend school from age six to eighteen or nineteen. The system varies throughout Germany because each Bundesland decides on their own educational policies. Most children, however, first attend Grundschule from age six to nine.
In contrast, secondary education includes four types of schools based on a pupil's ability as determined by teacher recommendations: the Gymnasium includes the most gifted children and prepares students for university studies; the Realschule has a broader range of emphasis for intermediary students; the Hauptschule prepares pupils for vocational education, and the Gesamtschule, or comprehensive school, combines the three approaches. There are also Förderschulen (schools for the mentally challenged and physically challenged). One in 21 students attends a Förderschule[1] [2]
In order to enter higher education, students are required to take the Abitur examination; however, students possessing a diploma from a vocational school may also apply to enter. A special system of apprenticeship called Duale Ausbildung allows pupils in vocational training to learn in a company as well as in a state-run school.[2] Although Germany has had a history of a strong educational system, recent PISA student assessments demonstrated a weakness in certain subjects. In the test of 43 countries in the year 2000[3], Germany ranked 21st in reading and 20th in both mathematics and the natural sciences, prompting calls for reform.[4]

Grundschule (elementary/primary school) can be preceded by voluntary Kindergarten or Vorschulklassen (preparatory classes for elementary school) and lasts four or six years, depending on the state. Year 13 is being phased out in some states.
Parents who are looking for a suitable school for their child have a considerable choice of elementary schools in Germany today:
After children have completed their primary education (at 10 years of age, 12 in Berlin and Brandenburg), there are four options for secondary schooling:
The grades 5 and 6 form an orientation phase (Orientierunsstufe) in which students, their parents and teachers should decide which of the above-mentioned tracks the students should follow. In all states except Berlin and Brandenburg, this orientation phase is embedded into the program of the secondary schools.[5] In Berlin and Brandenburg, the orientation is embedded into elementary schools. Teachers give a so-called educational (track) recommendation (Bildungs(gang)empfehlung) based on scholastic achievements in the main subjects (mathematics, German, science, foreign language), with details and legal implications differing from state to state.
In Germany, the 16 states have exclusive responsibility in the field of education. The federal parliament and the federal government can influence the educational system only by financial aid (to the states). Therefore, there are many different school systems; however, in every state the starting point is Grundschule (elementary school) for a period of four years (six in Berlin and Brandenburg).
All German states have Gymnasium as one possibility for skilled children, and all states - except Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, Saxony - have Gesamtschule, but in different forms. The eastern states Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt and Thuringia combine Hauptschule and Realschule to Sekundarschule, Mittelschule and Regelschule respectively. All other states distinguish between these schools types.
English is compulsory statewide in secondary schools. In some states, foreign language education starts in Grundschule. For example, in North Rhine-Westphalia, English study starts in the third year of school; Brandenburg starts either English or Polish, and Baden-Württemberg starts English in the first year. The list of available second foreign languages, as well as the amount of obligatory study of foreign languages, differs from state to state. French, Spanish and Latin are most frequently taken as the second foreign language. Many schools also offer volunteer study groups for learning other languages.
It may be problematic in terms of school studies for families to move from one state to another, because there are quite different curricula for almost every subject.
Adults who did not complete their high school education have the option of attending an Abendgymnasium or Abendrealschule (night school) later in life.


Historically, the Lutheran denomination had a strong influence on German culture, including its education. Martin Luther advocated compulsory schooling so that all people would independently be able to read and interpret the Bible. This concept became a model for schools throughout Germany.
During the 18th century, the Kingdom of Prussia was among the first countries in the world to introduce free and generally compulsory primary education, consisting of an eight-year course of primary education, Volksschule. It provided not only the skills needed in an early industrialized world (reading, writing, and arithmetic), but also a strict education in ethics, duty, discipline, and obedience. Affluent children often went on to attend preparatory private schools for an additional four years, but the general population had virtually no access to secondary education.
In 1810, after the Napoleonic wars, Prussia introduced state certification requirements for teachers, which significantly raised the standard of teaching. The final examination, Abitur, was introduced in 1788, implemented in all Prussian secondary schools by 1812, and extended to all of Germany in 1871. The state also established normal schools for the training of teachers in the common or elementary grade levels.

When the German Empire was formed in 1871, the school system became more centralized. In 1872, Prussia recognized the first separate secondary schools for girls. As learned professions demanded well-educated young people, more secondary schools were established, and the state claimed the sole right to set standards and to supervise the newly established schools.
Four different types of secondary schools developed:
By the turn of the 20th century, the four types of schools had achieved equal rank and privilege, although they did not have equal prestige.

After World War I, the Weimar Republic established a free, universal 4-year elementary school (Grundschule). Most students continued at these schools for another 4-year course. Those who were able to pay a small fee went on to an Intermediate school (Mittelschule) that provided a more challenging curriculum for an additional one or two years. Upon passing a rigorous entrance exam after year four, students could also enter one of the four types of secondary school.
During the Nazi era (1933-1945), indoctrination of Nazi ideologies was added to student education; however, the basic education system remained unchanged. See also: Nazi university.
After World War II, the Allied powers (Soviet Union, France, Britain, and the USA) ensured that Nazi ideas were eliminated from the curriculum. They installed educational systems in their respective occupation zones that reflected their own ideas. When West Germany gained partial independence in 1949, its new constitution (Grundgesetz) granted educational autonomy to the state (Länder) governments. This led to a widely varying school systems, often making it difficult for children to continue schooling whilst moving between states.
More recently, multi-state agreements ensure that basic requirements are universally met by all state school systems. Thus, all children are required to attend one type of school on a full-time basis (i.e. five or six days a week) from the age of 6 to the age of 16. A student may change schools if a student shows exceptionally good (or exceptionally poor) abilities. Graduation certificates from one state are recognized by all the other states. Training qualifies teachers for teaching posts in every state.

The German Democratic Republic (East Germany) started its own standardized education system in the 1960s. The East German equivalent of both primary and secondary schools was the Polytechnische Oberschule (poly-technical high school), which all students attended for 10 years, from the ages of 6 to 16. At the end of the 10th year, an exit examination was given. Depending upon the results, a student could choose to end their education or undertake an apprenticeship for an additional two years, followed by an Abitur. Students who performed very well and displayed loyalty to the ruling party could change to the Erweiterte Oberschule (extended high school), where they could take their Abitur examinations after 12 school years. Although this system was abolished in the early 1990s after reunification, it continues to influence school life in the eastern German states.

See also: Poverty in Germany
Children from poor immigrant or working class families are less likely to succeed in school than children from middle or upper-class backgrounds. This disadvantage for the financially challenged part of the population of Germany is bigger than in any other industrialized nation. [6] However, the true reasons stretch beyond economic ones. The poor also tend to be less educated. After controlling for parental education, money does not play a major role in children's academic outcomes.[7][8]
Immigrant children and youth, most of lower-class background, are the fastest-growing segment of the German population, so their prospects bear heavily on the well-being of the country. 30% of Germans aged 15 years and younger have at least one parent born abroad. In the big cities 60% of children aged 5 years and younger have at least one parent born abroad.[9]. Immigrant children academically underperform their peers[10] Immigrants have tended to be less educated than native Germans. After controlling for parental education, ethnic group does not play a role in children's academic outcomes.[11]
Immigrants from China and Vietnam are doing exceptionally well. In eastern Germany, Vietnamese and Chinese of lower-class background outperform students from European backgrounds (despite the fact that in most cases their parents are poorer and less educated than the parents of their European-born peers). Teachers in Eastern Germany also have been shown to be more motivated than teachers in Western Germany. That might be another reason for Asian achievement.[12]
Male gender is associated with low educational attainment in Germany. 63% percent of students attending special education programs for the academically challenged are male. Boys are less likely to meet the state-wide performance targets, more likely to drop out of school and are more likely to be classified emotionally disturbed. 86% of the students receiving special training because of emotional disturbance are male.[13] Research shows a class-effect: Middle-class boys are doing as well as middle-class girls in terms of educational achievement but lower-class boys are lagging behind lower-class girls. Lack of male role models contributes to lower-class boys' low academic achievement.[13]

Children whose families receive welfare, children whose parents dropped out of school, children of teenage parents, children raised by a lone parent, children raised in crime-ridden inner-city neighbourhoods, children who have multiple young siblings, and children who live in overcrowded substandard apartments are at risk of poor educational achievement in Germany. Often these factors go together, making it very hard for children to overcome the odds. A number of measures have been assessed to help those children reach their full potential.[14]

Kindergarten has been shown to improve school readiness in children at risk. Children attending a Kindergarten were less likely to have impaired speech or impaired motor development. Only 50% of children whose parents did not graduate from school, are ready for school at age six. If such children were enrolled in a high-quality three-year Kindergarten programme, 87% were ready for school at age six. Thus Kindergarten helps to overcome unequal opportunities.[15]

Families whose children are at risk for low academic achievement may be visited by trained professionals. They offer a wide variety of services that relate to each child's and each family's background and needs. Such professionals may visit pregnant low-income women and talk with them about positive health-related behaviors, such as following a healthy diet or refraining from the use of alcohol or tobacco while pregnant. Positive health-related behavior may have a major impact on children's school performance.
Home visitors may provide information on childcare and social services, help parents in crisis and model problem-solving skills. They may help implement the preschool/school curriculum at home or provide a curriculum of educational games designed to improve language, development and cognitive skills. In most cases, such support is offered to families on a voluntary basis. Families who are eligible for the program may decide for themselves whether or not they want to participate. There are no penalties if they decide against it or against continuing with the program.[16]

In Germany most children are streamed by ability into different schools after fourth grade. The Progress in International Reading Literacy Study revealed that working class children needed better reading abilities than middle-class children to be nominated for the Gymnasium. After controlling for reading abilities, odds to be nominated to Gymnasium for upper middle-class children were still 2.63 times better than for working-class children.
to be nominated for Gymnasium


Although German students are not very different from other students across the world, there are organizational differences. The main points are outlined below; however, it should be noted that there are additional differences across the 16 states of Germany.
