Orisha
An Orisha (also spelled Orisa or Orixa) is a spirit or deity that reflects one of the manifestations of Olodumare (God) in the Yoruba spiritual or religious system (Olodumare is also known by various other names including Olorun, Eledumare, Eleda and Olofin-Orun). This religion has found its way throughout the world and is now expressed in several varieties which include Anago, Oyotunji, Candomblé, Lucumí/Santería, and the Orisa religion of Trinidad, as well as some aspects of Umbanda, Winti, Obeah, Vodun and Vodou as well as many others. These varieties or spiritual lineages as they are called are practiced throughout areas of Nigeria, the Republic of Benin, Togo, Brazil, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Puerto Rico, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, the United States, and Venezuela among others. As interest in African indigenous religions (spiritual systems) grows, Orisha communities and lineages can be found in parts of Europe and Asia as well. While estimates vary, there could be more than 100 million adherents of this spiritual tradition worldwide.[citation needed]

The Orisha faith believes in a Supreme Being, named Olodumare. Adherents of the religion appeal to specific manifestations of Olodumare in the form of the various Orishas. Ancestors and culture-heroes held in reverence can also be enlisted for help with day-to-day problems. Faithful believers will also generally consult a geomantic divination specialist, known as a babalawo or Iyanifa, to mediate in their problems. This practice is known as Ifa divination, and is an important part of life throughout West Africa and the rest of the diaspora world. UNESCO, the cultural and scientific education arm of the United Nations, declared Ifa a Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity in 2005. An important part of the traditional Yoruba faith is that the Yoruba believe their ancestor Oduduwa fell from the sky and brought with him much of what is now their belief system. Part of this is the belief that daily life depends on proper alignment and knowledge of one's Ori. Ori literally means the head, but in spiritual matters is taken to mean an inner portion of the soul which determines personal destiny and success. Ase, which is also spelled “Axe,” “Axé,” “Ashe,” or “Ache,” is the life-force which runs though all things, living and inanimate. Ashe is the power to make things happen. It is an affirmation which is used in greetings and prayers, as well as a concept about spiritual growth. Orisha devotees strive to obtain Ashe through Iwa-Pele or gentle and good character, and in turn they experience alignment with the Ori, or what others might call inner peace or satisfaction with life. As to having over a 100 million adherent of the faith could be true as the yoruba's in Nigeria could be over 25 million people and this is a traditional yoruba way of life, which kind of point to a fact that these people could have been yoruba's who were sold in to slavery.

Many Yoruba people were brought to the Americas during the Maafa, along with many other ethnic nationalities from West, Central, and parts of East Africa. Yoruba religious beliefs are among the most recognizable African-derived traditions in the Americas, perhaps due to the comparatively late arrival of large numbers of Yoruba in the Americas and the conglomerative and spiritually tolerant nature of the faith. The Orisa faith is often closely aligned to the beliefs of the Gbe ethnic nationalities (including Fon, Ewe, Mahi, and Egun), and there have been centuries of creative cross-fertilization between the faith communities in Africa and in the Americas. In many countries of the African diaspora, Yoruba and Gbe beliefs have also influenced and become influenced by Catholicism and faiths which originate in the Kongo-Angolan cultural region of West-Central Africa. These include Palo in Cuba and the Dominican Republic, Umbanda in Brazil and, according to some sources, the Petro rites of Haitian Vodou.
Santeria (or Lukumĺ) is a set of related religious systems which use Catholic saints as a mask to hide traditional Yoruba beliefs. Saints and other Catholic religious figures are used as disguises for Orishas. However, this process should not be confused with syncretism, as the Catholic saints were never worshiped.

The Orisha pantheon includes Aganju, Obalu Aye, Erinle, Eshu/Elegba, Yemaya, Nana Buluku, Obà, Obatala, Ochosi|Osoosi, Oshumare, Ogoun|Ogunda, Oko, Olofi, Olokun, Olorun, Orunmila, Oshun, Osun, Oya, Ozain, and Shango, among countless others. In the Lucumi tradition, Osun and Oshun are different Orishas. Oshun is the beautiful and benevolent Orisha of love, life, marriage, sex and money while Osun is the protector of the Ori, or our heads and inner Orisha. The Yoruba also venerate their ancestral spirits through Egungun masquerade, Orò, Irumole, Gelede and Ibeji,the orisha of Twins (which is no wonder since the Yoruba have the world's highest incidence of twin births of any group). In fact the world capital of twins is the Yoruba town of Igboora with an average of 150 twins per 1 000 birth.

Eshu/Eleggua
Iansan/Iansã, Orixá of wind, change
Nanã, The oldest Orixá in Candomblé
Pair of Ibeji
Babalu Aye/Omolú
Iansan/Iansã
Ogoun/Ogum


