Stargate SG-1
Stargate SG-1 (often abbreviated as SG-1) is an American-Canadian military science fiction television series and part of MGM's Stargate franchise. The show was created by Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner, based on the 1994 feature film Stargate by Dean Devlin and Roland Emmerich. Wright, Glassner and Robert C. Cooper served as showrunners at different times of production. The first five seasons of the television series were broadcast by Showtime before the series moved to the Sci Fi Channel for its last five seasons, making the show the longest-running North American science fiction series on television. Stargate SG-1 premiered on Showtime on July 27, 1997; its final episode premiered on Sky1 in the United Kingdom on March 13, 2007. The television series was filmed in and around Vancouver, Canada.
The story of Stargate SG-1 begins one year after the events of the feature film. A network of ancient alien devices called Stargates connects the far reaches of several galaxies, opening the door for near-instantaneous interstellar travel. Stargate SG-1 chronicles the adventures of SG-1, the flagship team of over two dozen teams from Earth who explore the galaxy and defend Earth against alien threats such as the Goa'uld, Replicators and later the Ori. The composition of the SG-1 team is stable in the show's first five seasons but changes annually in the remaining seasons. The series expands upon many Ancient mythologies such as Egyptian mythology, Norse mythology, and Arthurian legend. The 2008 direct-to-DVD films Stargate: The Ark of Truth and Stargate: Continuum continue the adventures of SG-1; a third yet unnamed direct-to-DVD film is planned.
The series was a ratings success for Showtime and the Sci Fi Channel but received little critical response despite its popularity with fans, particularly in Europe and Australia. Stargate SG-1 was nominated for and won numerous awards in its ten-season run. Stargate SG-1 spawned the animated television series Stargate Infinity in 2002, and the live-action spin-off TV series Stargate Atlantis in 2004. A live-action TV series named Stargate Universe is in production for a 2009 premiere. Merchandise for Stargate SG-1 includes games and toys, print media and an original audio series.

Stargate SG-1 follows the present-day adventures of SG-1, a military team from Earth that, along with two dozen other SG teams, ventures to distant planets. They use an alien device known as a Stargate, which is housed in a top-secret U.S. military base known as Stargate Command (SGC) underneath Cheyenne Mountain in Colorado Springs, Colorado. The mission of the SG teams is to explore the galaxy and search for technology and form alliances with friendly advanced races for defense from the Goa'uld, a snake-like parasitic alien race that started taking humans as unwilling hosts thousands of years ago. The Goa'uld transported human slaves to other habitable planets across the galaxy and pose to them as gods of Earth mythologies such as Egyptian mythology, Greek mythology and Roman mythology. Later in the series, Stargate SG-1 also expands upon Norse mythology via the fictional Asgard race and Arthurian legend via the fictional Ancients and Ori.

The pilot episode, set one year after the events of the original film, introduces the Goa'uld System Lord and main villain Apophis (Peter Williams) as he makes a violent visit to Earth. When the Earth Stargate is revealed to be part of an enormous intergalactic network connecting countless planets, the SGC military base is brought back into action. SG teams are created to help defend Earth against the Goa'uld, who have interstellar warships and vast armies of Jaffa (hereditary slaves and human incubators to the Goa'uld) at their disposal. Earth's flagship team SG-1, among them Apophis's defected lead Jaffa soldier Teal'c, initiates several alliances with other races in the galaxy, such as the Goa'uld-like but truly symbiotic Tok'ra, the advanced human Tollan, the pacifist Nox, and the Roswell-like Asgard. SG-1 also encounters remnants of the Ancients, a nearly extinct race of Ascended Beings with extraordinary powers who originally built the Stargate network. Another alien threat arises in season 3 in the form of sentient machines called Replicators, who are on the verge of wiping out the Asgard. Meanwhile, rogue agents of Earth's NID organization repeatedly attempt to take control of the Stargate and other alien technology for their own ends. Despite the death of Apophis in the season 5 premiere, the Goa'uld remain a major foe in Stargate SG-1 until the end of season 8. The System Lord Ba'al (Cliff Simon) is the only influential Goa'uld in the last two seasons of Stargate SG-1. He is defeated in the direct-to-DVD film Stargate Continuum.

After Apophis's defeat in the season 5 premiere, the half-Ascended Goa'uld System Lord Anubis (David Palffy) becomes the new main villain. Anubis has much knowledge of the Ancients and their technology, with which he creates an army of almost invincible Kull Warriors to wipe out many of his fellow System Lords in season 6 and 7. SG-1 discovers a powerful weapon in an Ancient Outpost in Antarctica in the season 7 finale and annihilates Anubis's entire fleet. While Ba'al subsumes much of Anubis's power in season 8, Anubis secretly regains control of his forces. Human-form Replicators begin to conquer the System Lords, but SG-1 finds and adjusts an Ancient weapon to destroy all Replicators throughout the galaxy. The end of season 8 reveals the Ascended Being Oma Desala (Mel Harris) to be responsible for Anubis's original ascension. While she engages Anubis in an eternal stalemated battle on the Ascended plane to prevent his acting on the mortal plane, the System Lords have already been decimated, the Replicators annihilated, and the Jaffa win their freedom from Goa'uld rule.

The SG-1 team disbands after the events of season 8, but an Ancient communication device in the SGC inadvertently draws the attention of the Ancient-like Ori from another galaxy to the existence of sentient life in the Milky Way. While the Ori send advanced human beings named Priors to the Milky Way to spread a religion that augments the Ori's power, Ba'al and some minor Goa'uld infiltrate Earth through the Trust (a coalition of rogue NID operatives) to rebuild their power. At the end of season 9, the Ori begin an evangelical crusade with their warships and effortlessly wipe out the combined fleet of Earth and its allies. The leader of the Ori, Adria (Morena Baccarin) is introduced in the premiere of season 10. SG-1 searches for the Sangraal, an Ancient weapon that might defeat the Ori, while Ba'al and his clones attempt to find the weapon for their own purposes. With the help of the powerful Ancient Merlin (Matthew Walker), SG-1 finds the construction plans of the Sangraal and sends a working version to the Ori galaxy. The Ori arc and Adria's ascension in the penultimate season 10 episode are wrapped up in the direct-to-DVD film Stargate: The Ark of Truth.



Brad Wright and Jonathan Glassner had worked together on the MGM television series The Outer Limits since 1995. Brad Wright saw a wide range of possible sci-fi storylines in the original Stargate feature film that could take place in present-day.[7] Meanwhile, Jonathan Glassner was interested in the feature film's theme that Ancient Egypt had been partially or completely built by aliens.[8] Upon hearing of MGM's plan to create a television spin-off series of the film, Wright and Glassner independently and unbeknownst to each other approached MGM and proposed their concept for the television series. MGM president John Symes greenlit the project on the condition that Wright and Glassner work together as executive producers of the new show.[8] The show was named Stargate SG-1 after Wright flightily agreed to Symes's pitch question if the team should be called "SG-1". MGM released posters titled Stargate SG-1 within the next week without the knowledge of Wright and Glassner.[9]
John Symes approached Michael Greenburg and Richard Dean Anderson of MacGyver fame.[8] Although Richard Dean Anderson was never a real fan of the science fiction genre, he believed the original feature film to be a good vehicle for a series.[7] Anderson agreed to become involved with the project if his character Jack O'Neill was allowed significantly more comedic leeway than Kurt Russell's character in the feature film. He also requested Stargate SG-1 to be more of an ensemble show, so that he would not be carrying the plot alone as on MacGyver.[10] The American subscription channel Showtime made a two-season commitment for 44 episodes in 1996.[
