Neurodiversity
Neurodiversity is an idea which asserts that atypical (neurodivergent) neurological development is a normal human difference that is to be recognized and respected as any other human variation.[1] The concept of neurodiversity is embraced by some autistic individuals and people with related conditions. Some groups apply the concept of neurodiversity to conditions potentially unrelated (or non-concomitant) to autism such as bipolar disorder, ADHD,[2] developmental speech disorders, Parkinson's disease, dyslexia, and dyspraxia.[2]

According to an article in New York Magazine, the term was put forward by Judy Singer and first published by Harvey Blume.[3] The earliest published use of the term appears in a New York Times article by Harvey Blume on September 30, 1998:[4]
Previous to this, although Blume did not make explicit use of the term Neurodiversity, he wrote in a New York Times piece on June 30, 1997:[5]
Yet, in trying to come to terms with an NT-dominated world, autistics are neither willing nor able to give up their own customs. Instead, they are proposing a new social compact, one emphasizing neurological pluralism.
The consensus emerging from the Internet forums and Web sites where autistics congregate (...) is that NT is only one of many neurological configurations -- the dominant one certainly, but not necessarily the best.
Blume is also notable for his early public advocacy and prediction of the role the internet would play in fostering neurodiversity.[6]
[ ... ] the community of autistics, which may not have matured and come to self-awareness without the Internet, presents the rest of us with a challenge.
The challenge we will all be increasingly confronted with, on-line and off, is, to look at ourselves differently than we have before, that is, to accept neurological diversity.
The term mostly appears within the online autistic community, but its usage has spread to a more general meaning; for example, the Developmental Adult Neurodiversity Association (DANDA) in the UK encompasses developmental dyspraxia, ADHD, Asperger syndrome and related conditions.[7] Usage of the term has seen a boost with a 2004 New York Times article by Amy Harmon, "The Disability Movement Turns to Brains".[1]

Neurodiversity was prefigured by the work of French historian and theorist Michel Foucault, whose book Folie et déraison ("Madness and unreason"; published in an abridged version in English as Madness and Civilization, and eventually in full as The History of Madness) influenced the anti-psychiatry movement of the 1960s.
Many supporters of neurodiversity are anti-cure autistics,[citation needed] who are engaged in advocacy; some parents of autistic children also support neurodiversity. Such parents say they value their children's individuality and want to allow their children to develop naturally. For example, Morton Ann Gernsbacher is a parent of an autistic child and a psychology professor, who argues that autistics need acceptance, not a cure, and endorses the theory that autism cannot be separated from the person.[8]


