Basshunter
Jonas Erik Altberg (born 22 December 1984), better known by the pseudonym Basshunter, is a Swedish singer-songwriter and DJ. Basshunter describes his own music as Eurodance, while others may also interpret it as club, and other electronic music genres.[citation needed]
Basshunter's fifth album is currently in production, to be completed around May 2009.[1]

Jonas Erik Altberg was born on 22 December 1984 in Halmstad, Sweden. He lived with his parents and younger brother near Tylösand, a famous Swedish beach. He started to produce music under the stage name "Basshunter" in 1999 with the computer program Fruity Loops (now called FL Studio), and released his first albums, The Old Shit and The Bassmachine, through his own home page in 1999 and 2004 respectively. His interest in music became greater as he progressed. After several demo songs spread over the internet, he started to get phone calls from dance clubs that wanted to hire him as a DJ. In April 2006, he signed his first contract with Warner Music, releasing his first single, "Boten Anna". In Scandinavia, the song became a hit instantly and was the first ever Swedish language song to reach number one on the Dutch Top 40 Chart. His major label debut album, LOL <(^^,)> would chart all over Europe and launch him into the forefront of dance music[citation needed]. When Basshunter reached 50,000 friends on MySpace, he celebrated by releasing "Beer in the Bar - Myspace Edit" and chatting via webcam with fans. In 2007, Altberg released a re-recording of "Boten Anna", titled "Now You're Gone", featuring entirely rewritten lyrics to appeal to a foreign market. The song subsequently charted at number one on the UK Singles Chart, and stayed there for 5 weeks.
Throughout 2007, Basshunter was working on a new album, titled Now You're Gone: The Album, after the leading single it was released on 14 July 2008. He has also released a small clip of "Camilla", while the song "I Can Walk On Water, I Can Fly" leaked unintentionally. After a planned release, "Please Don't Go", another single, was cancelled in an email to subscribers of the Hard2Beat newsletter. The single release was instead switched to "All I Ever Wanted", an English re-recording of "Vi sitter i Ventrilo och spelar DotA", in the vein of "Now You're Gone". Within the single newsletter, it was also revealed that the next album was indeed "on its way", along with the single, and that the album would be English reworkings of classic Basshunter songs.[citation needed]
The third single released in the UK was "Angel in the Night" not "Please Don't Go", which many fans speculated would be released instead[citation needed].
When interviewed by The Daily Mirror, Basshunter stated he would like to do a collaboration with Madonna as well as Robbie Williams stating that they were legends[citation needed].
The fourth single, "I Miss You" was released on 15 December 2008 alongside the fifth single "Jingle Bells (Bass)".
Altberg has been diagnosed with Tourette syndrome.[2][3]



