List of highest-grossing films
The following is a non-definitive list of the all-time highest-grossing films.

The list has more 2008 films in the top 50 than any other year with eight, followed by 2007 with seven, then 2006 and 2004, with five. Over 75 percent of films in the top 50 were released after 2000, while no film prior to 1977 appears in the list because inflation, population size and ticket purchasing trends are not considered. Figures are given in United States dollars (USD).

These numbers come from Box Office Mojo, including their list of All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses, and includes re-released films.

Due to the long-term effects of inflation, notably the significant increase of movie theater ticket prices, the list unadjusted for inflation gives far more weight to more recent films; a film in 1910, given much lower ticket prices at that time, would have to sell close to 100 times as many tickets as a 2007 film in order for the two to have equal gross takings.[1] Further complications are added by changing currency values. The unadjusted list, while commonly found in the press, is therefore largely meaningless for comparing films widely separated in time, as many films from earlier eras will never appear on a modern unadjusted list, despite achieving higher commercial success when adjusted for price increases.[2] Some have suggested that studios prefer not to make inflation adjustments because doing so would reduce the grossing numbers and eliminate the ability to advertise new box-office "records". [2]
In the United States, Box Office Mojo, the Guinness Book of World Records, and Entertainment Weekly, claim that Gone With The Wind is domestically the highest-grossing film of all time when adjusted for inflation.
The relationship between movie ticket prices and inflation do not necessarily parallel one another. For example, in 1970 movie tickets cost $1.55 or about $6.68 in inflation-adjusted dollars, which is higher than today’s average ticket price. Inflation-adjusted movie ticket prices peaked during the 1970s and by 1980 inflation-adjusted movie-ticket prices had dropped to about $2.69 or about $5.50 in inflation-adjusted dollars, which is less than what they are today.[3]
Social, political, and economic factors influence the number of people willing to pay to go to the movies as well. These factors can be determined by calculating the per capita ticket-purchasing rate for a particular year. Normalizing this to the reference year normalizes all social, economical, and political factors such as the availability of expendable cash, number of theater screens, relative cost of tickets, competition from television, the rapid releases of movies on DVDs, the improvement of home theater equipment and film bootlegging. For example, in 1946 the per capita movie ticket purchasing rate for the average person was 34 tickets a year. In 2004, this average rate had dropped to only 5 tickets per person per year, in response mainly to competition from television.[4]

This is a list of the highest-grossing films by year.[5][6] Gross numbers prior to 1977 include every release of the film.
Film Booking Offices of America (FBO)

