Ratatouille
Ratatouille (pronounced /Àår√¶t…ôÀàtuÀêiÀê/, /-ÀàtwiÀê/; French pronunciation: IPA:†[ Åatatuj]) is a traditional French Proven√ßal stewed vegetable dish, originating in Nice. The full name of the dish is ratatouille ni√ßoise.[1]

The word ratatouille comes from Occitan ratatolha. It is also used in French (touiller, also means to toss food). Ratatouille originated in the area around present day Occitan Proven√ßa (French: Provence) & Ni√ßa (French: Nice, Occitan: Ni√ßa); the Catalan "xamfaina" and the Majorcan "tombet" are versions of the same dish.[2]

Ratatouille is usually served as a side dish, but also may be served as a meal on its own (accompanied by rice or bread). Tomatoes are a key ingredient, with garlic, onions, zucchini (courgettes), eggplant (aubergine), bell peppers (poivron), marjoram and basil, or bay leaf and thyme, or a mix of green herbs like herbes de Provence. There is much debate on how to make a traditional ratatouille. One method is to simply saute all of the vegetables together. Others, including Julia Child, insist on a layering approach, where the eggplant and the courgettes are sauteed separately, while the tomatoes, onion, garlic and bell peppers are made into a sauce. The ratatouille is then layered in a casserole ‚Äì eggplant, courgettes, tomato/pepper mixture ‚Äì then baked in an oven.
When ratatouille is used as a filling for savory crepes or to fill an omelette, the pieces are sometimes cut smaller than in the illustration. Also, unnecessary moisture is reduced by straining the liquid with a colander into a bowl, reducing it in a hot pan, then adding one or two tablespoons of reduced liquid back into the vegetables.
Filled eggplant dishes exist in Sicilian, Maltese, Greek, Venetian and Dalmatian/Croatian cuisine, but the latter include salted sardines or anchovies.[3] [4] There is a similar Spanish dish, pisto manchego.
American chef Thomas Keller invented a contemporary variation, confit byaldi, for the 2007 animated film Ratatouille.


