Mr. Men
Mr. Men is a series of 48 (only 46 published in English) children's books by Roger Hargreaves started in 1971. Little Miss was an accompanying series of 42 (only 33 published in English) books by the same author with female characters that started in 1981. After Hargreaves' death in 1988, his son, Adam Hargreaves, began writing and illustrating new stories involving the Mr. Men and Little Miss characters, including the creation of ten new characters, four of which were inspired by work Roger Hargreaves had produced before his death.

Mr. Tickle was the first Mr. Men character created by Hargreaves after his son, Adam, asked him what a tickle looked like: a round, orange figure with long, bendy arms. Each book in the original Mr. Men and Little Miss series introduced a different title character and their single dominant trait in order to convey a double simple moral lesson. The Mr. Men and Little Miss characters would frequently reappear in the later books of other characters. The books' simple and silly stories, with bright-coloured, boldly drawn illustrations, made them quite popular, with sales over 100 million worldwide in 22 languages.
In 2001, a competition was held in the Sunday Times for children to submit their own Mr. Men character, which was to be published in a limited edition to celebrate the 30th anniversary of the series. Mr. Cheeky by 8 year-old Gemma Almond was the winner, and her creation was then published and sold only in branches of W H Smith, with a portion of the proceeds going to a charity for children's leukemia.
In April 2004, Hargreaves' widow, Christine, sold the rights to the Mr. Men and Little Miss characters to the UK entertainment group, Chorion.
In 2006, to celebrate 35 years of Mr. Men (and 25 years of Little Miss) Mr. Birthday and Little Miss Birthday were published. There was also an art exhibition at The Art Animation Gallery[1] in Central London, and in October 2006, Adam Hargreaves created the first Little Miss character based on a real person; 'Little Miss Stella', based on Stella McCartney, appeared in a limited edition of 1,000 books produced as fashion show invitations.[2]
The typeface for the Little Miss books from Bossy to Star is Univers; the books from Busy to Sommersault use Helvetica; and all the other books in the series use Optima.

The Mr. Men characters have been adapted into four animated television series. The first was produced in 1975 by Terry Ward's company, Flicks Films, formerly known as 101 Film Productions, with the voices and the narration provided by Arthur Lowe (better known for his role as Captain Mainwaring in the sitcom Dad's Army). During 1983, a second series by Flicks Films featured the Little Miss characters, and was narrated by John and Pauline Alderton (credited as Pauline Collins). The third series, Mr. Men and Little Miss, was produced in 1995 and aired on TV from 1995 to 1997 and was narrated by Geoffrey Palmer.
In 2006 Renegade Animation produced The Mr. Men Show, a new animated series which debuted on Channel Five's Milkshake! (UK) in February 2008. There would only be 25 characters featured in the first season, and most have had their names or appearances altered. The Mr. Men Show is directed by Mark Risley and written and produced by Eryk Casemiro and Kate Boutilier, the creative team from Nickelodeon's Rugrats, The Wild Thornberrys and As Told by Ginger. The opening and closing narration is voiced by actor Simon Callow in the UK version and Joseph J. Terry in the US version.


There are 80 licensees selling Mr. Men and Little Miss products.

Following is a list of published book titles with associated summaries of their texts.

Mr Happy has probably appeared in more Mr Men and Little Miss stories than any other character. He is seen in Mr. Rude's story, as well as Little Miss Magic, Little Miss Helpful, etc..
He went on a journey to cure himself, where he encountered sunshine and magic in equal proportions.
His poor red nose often needs a good blow, and he is never without his trusty hanky. But his sneezing ends up saving the day.
His accident-prone nature has cost him many jobs; but his luck changes when Mr. Barley the farmer employs him to work in his apple orchard. Now our bumping beauty spends his time wandering around the orchard, and knocking all the apples off the trees.
The two men “brushed, swept, polished and scrubbed” his house until it sparkled. And after they’d turned their attention to Mr. Messy, and bathed him, he looked in the mirror and remarked: “I’m going to have to change my name!”
His whole backwards life is; and his jumbled come out words. He comes to hotel in a stay, where he chaos causes town in the.
Going nightmare is a shopping for hapless shopkeepers; and street down the walking is very drivers for hazardous.
Thankfully our little friends the goblins take an interest in Mr Uppity, and use their magic powers to frighten him into behaving like a decent person.
Mr. Small is, unsurprisingly, the smallest of the Mr. Men. He lives in a house underneath a daisy, at the bottom of Mr. Robinson’s garden. His tiny size is an occupational hazard, as he soon finds out when he falls into sweet jars, mustard pots and match boxes. But he finds eternal happiness and fame when a man decides to write a book all about his adventures.
However boring his life sounds, it soon becomes exciting when Mr Busy and Mr Bustle come to visit him. They've got all sorts of things for Mr Lazy to do, but he is never too keen to be getting on with them, not when there's sleeping to be getting on with!
He performed his unique act of amusing magic at the zoo, which was closed due to all the animals having colds. Good old Mr. Funny pulled funny faces at the elephant, the lion, the bear, and the giraffe, and left them in fits of giggles.
He’s only too happy to lend a hand, but instead, usually ends up making the situation worse. Ask him to push and he’ll pull. Ask him to pick something up, and he’ll put it down.
But the clever people of Seatown realised that the way to get him to do the right thing, is to ask him to do the opposite.
He’s not very bright and all his neighbours delight in making him look stupid. When Mr. Dizzy drinks the water from the wishing well, he magically becomes intelligent and is able to outwit the pig and the elephant who had both made him look silly earlier.
It just goes to prove that if clever people can be confused by nice but dim Mr. Dizzy, then they should do it.
His strength sometimes gets him in trouble, and he regularly breaks everything he touches by accident. But sometimes it helps save the day, especially if there is something really heavy that needs carrying.
Everything he touches, breaks or ends up where it shouldn't. Everywhere he goes, chaos erupts.
No one can hear him, and everything scares him there. Luckily for him, Mr Happy comes to the rescue, and finds him a far more suitable life and job.
The trouble is that he goes so fast that he doesn't get anything done properly, that is until he gets his ideal job... A Postman!
It takes him just four minutes to walk 40 miles; he can step over trees; and he can dangle his feet in the sea whilst sitting on the edge of a cliff. But Mr. Tall is gloomy about his long legs.
Luckily, Mr. Tickle, Mr. Nosey and Mr. Greedy are on hand to tell him that over proportioned body parts can be a benefit.
Being the best friend of Mr. Silly, and living in Nonsenseland, he certainly lives up to his name.
When it snows (yellow snow, of course), the two of them go tobogganing in their makeshift toboggan - Mr. Nonsense’s bed boat!
And somehow he manages to make square snow balls!
Everything about his life is a shambles until he meets Mr Right, someone who looks just like Mr Wrong, but is exactly his opposite.
Mr Right is determined to turn his new friend into someone right, but then everything goes terribly wrong!
Mr. Greedy eats anything and everything in abundance; whilst Mr. Skinny survives on one cornflake, a baked bean and the world's smallest sausage.
Mr. Happy, Mr. Greedy, and Mr. Funny all fall prey to Mr. Mischief and his tricks. Until, that is, he meets a wizard. As Mr. Mischief tries to swap his magic wand for a piece of wood, the wizard grabs him by the nose, and warns him he won’t get away with his tricks again. As the mischievous man goes home, all the pranks he played on the others are repeated on him, and he learns his lesson.
But not for long … as Mr. Fussy finds out to his cost.
Not only that, but he has some fantastic gadgets, such as his alarm clock that makes tea; and his toothbrush that squeezes out the toothpaste for him. How clever!
But Mr. Clever is also very smug. He believes that no one can get the better of him, because of his superior intelligence. But of course, many do … and Mr. Happy is one of them.
Mr. Busy lives next door to Mr. Slow, which must make life unbearable for both of them.
He's very useful to have around when any of the other Mr Men are in trouble.
Except when it involves heights or getting the wrong side of Little Miss Bossy!
He hates laughing; he hates singing; he hates people who pretend to be clowns. And he hates being turned into a pig -- which is exactly what happens whenever he grumbles.
Luckily the wizard's spell works it's magic, and Mr. Grumble stops his moaning in order to stop himself oinking.
He is perfect.
When Little Miss Splendid demands he take his hat off when greeting a lady. In doing so, he reveals that he has only three hairs on the top of his head. Little Miss Splendid reminds him it is not his hair, but his large smile that people love him for. As the final sentence in the final book reads “Hats off to Mr. Cheerful!”
Mr Rude is always being rude to People He has a french accent. He insults a man with a big nose and an overweight woman. To the overweight woman he says "Fatty!, you're supposed to eat the things in the fridge, not eat the fridge as well!".

But she gets a shocking discovery when Mr. Muddle messes up her clean house.
She tricks Mr.Uppity, and Mr. Clever into putting the hurt of Mr.Small.
But Little Miss Trouble gets her just desserts when Mr.Smalls gives her a taste of her own medicine.
She tries to put her powers to use when Mr. Tickle goes on a tickling rampage by shrinking his arms!
But somebody doesn't like this change, and that is Mr. Tickle.
Until Mr. Funny invites her to a birthday party!
