Ancient Egyptian religion
 Ancient Egypt Portal
Ancient Egyptian religion encompasses the various religious beliefs and rituals practiced in ancient Egypt over more than 3,000 years, from the predynastic period until the adoption of Christianity in the early centuries C.E. Initially these beliefs centered on the worship of multiple deities who represented various forces of nature. By the time of the 18th dynasty they began to be viewed as aspects of a single deity who existed apart from nature, similar to trinitarian concepts also found in Christianity: the belief that one god can exist in more than one person.[1] These deities were worshipped with offerings and prayers, in local and household shrines as well as in formal temples managed by priests. Different gods were prominent at different periods of Egyptian history, and the myths associated with them changed over time, so Egypt never had a coherent hierarchy of deities or a unified mythology. However, the religion contained many overarching beliefs. Among these were the divinity of the pharaoh, which helped to politically unify the country,[2] and complex beliefs about an afterlife, which gave rise to the Egyptians' elaborate burial customs.


The Egyptian gods were deifications of various natural phenomena. These could be animals, as with Sekhmet, who represented the ferocity of lions, or inanimate elements, such as Shu, the deification of air. They could also represent more abstract things, as Horus represented the power of kingship. Egyptian myths about the gods were intended to explain the origins and behavior of these forces of nature. Similarly, the hymns, prayers and offerings given to the gods were efforts to placate these forces and turn them to human advantage.[3] However, some deities had multiple mythological roles, and many natural forces, such as the sun, were associated with multiple deities.[4] Deceased pharaohs were also regarded as divine,[5] and occasionally, distinguished commoners such as Imhotep also became deified.[6]
In addition to the major gods, there were also other, less-powerful supernatural beings. These included the spirits of deceased humans, which were believed to exist on the same plane as the gods,[7] and could affect the world of the living in similar ways.[8] There were also a multitude of minor gods, which are sometimes called "demons". They tended to be less universal than the major gods, and were often defined by specific behaviors or tied to particular locations. Some of them were localized guardian deities, while others were servants of greater gods who performed specific actions on demand. Most of these were inhabitants of the Duat, the Egyptian underworld, although many others were present in the world of the living.[9]
In art, many of the gods were shown as animals, or as humans with the heads of animals. These depictions were not intended literally, but were instead symbolic of each god's role in nature.[10] Thus, the funerary god Anubis was portrayed as a jackal because of jackals' habit of scavenging in cemeteries, while his black skin was derived from the color of mummified flesh.[11]
Many gods were associated with particular localities within Egypt where their cults were most important. However, these associations changed over time, and they did not necessarily mean that the god associated with a place had originated there. For instance, the god Monthu was the original patron of the city of Thebes. Over the course of the Middle Kingdom, however, he was displaced in that role by Amun, who had originated elsewhere. [12] The national popularity and importance of individual gods fluctuated in a similar way.

There was a period in the 14th century BCE when the pharaoh Akhenaten promoted the worship of the sun-disk Aten over the other deities. Eventually he prohibited the worship of the other gods, converting the official religion of Egypt into true monotheism.[13] However, Akhenaten's changes contrasted with the syncretic tradition of earlier Egyptian belief, and this exclusivity alienated ordinary Egyptians.[14] Thus, under Akhenaten's successors Egypt reverted to its traditional religion.[15]


In Egyptian belief, the world was surrounded by the infinite expanse of water from which it had originally arisen. This water was personified as the god Nu. The earth was envisioned as a flat plate of land, represented by the god Geb. Above him arched the body of the sky goddess Nut, who represented the surface of the primordial water. Shu, the air, stood between Geb and Nut and separated them. Beneath Geb lay another space equivalent to the living world: the Duat, or underworld. The sky beneath the Duat was formed by the feminine counterpart of Nu, Naunet. During the day, the sun god Ra traveled over the earth, across the surface of Nut, and at night he traveled over the Duat, across the surface of Naunet.[16]

The Egyptian word Ma'at encompasses several concepts in English, including "truth," "justice," and "order." It referred to the divine order of the universe, both in nature and in human society. In nature, Ma'at included the structure of the world that kept each element in its place, and the cyclical patterns of time; it meant all the forces of nature existing in balance. Among humans, Ma'at meant that all people and all classes of society lived in harmony. The Egyptians considered any disruption of Ma'at inherently harmful, so all people were expected to behave in accordance with it. Ma'at was the most fundamental of all natural forces, believed to have existed from the creation of the universe, and as a force of nature it was often personified as a goddess.[17]

Egyptians viewed kingship itself as a force of nature; thus, the pharaoh, or king of Egypt, was both human and divine.[18] He therefore acted as intermediary between Egypt's people and the gods.[19] He was key to upholding Maat in society, by defending the country from enemies, appointing fair officials, settling disputes between his people, managing the food supply, and appeasing the gods with temples and offerings.[20] Thus, temple reliefs often depict the pharaoh presenting an emblem of Maat to the gods, representing his maintenance of the divine order.[21] Such was his importance that the Egyptian word for "king" referred only to the pharaoh; any foreign ruler, no matter how powerful, was simply called "great chief."[22]
The king was also associated with several specific deities. While alive, a pharaoh was identified with Horus, and given the title "Son of Ra." The goddesses Isis, Hathor, and Mut were all seen as the mother of the pharaoh.[23] A deceased king was viewed as fully divine, and identified with Osiris (the father of Horus) and with Ra.[24]

In Egypt there was no single religious scripture. However, there were many religious texts for various purposes. These include devotional writings, funerary texts,[25] and texts relating various myths.

The Egyptians had a great number of separate myths, found in various places and often existing in different versions. Some mythological information is found in temples; however, temples were meant to celebrate the eternal power and benevolence of the gods, and the turbulent events often found in myths conflicted with this purpose. In addition, Egyptians believed that to write or depict negative mythological events, especially in a medium as permanent as stone, risked giving power to the forces of chaos. Thus, temples contain surprisingly few myths. Mythological information can be found on devotional statues and stelae offered to the gods by individuals, and much more is found in funerary texts.[26] Even so, complete mythical narratives can only be found in Greek and Roman sources.[27]
Among the most important Egyptian myths were the creation myths. While there were several different creation myths, they all shared common elements: an infinite, lifeless ocean which preceded the creation, and a pyramidal mound of land which was the first thing to emerge from this ocean.[28] However, the creation accounts differ in focusing on different gods. One creation myth describes the Ogdoad, the group of eight gods who embodied the primeval waters, and how their meeting resulted in the creation and emergence of the mound.[29] Another myth relates the actions of Atum, said to be the first god to appear on the mound, who gave rise to the Ennead, nine gods representing the natural forces of the world. A third myth says that the god Ptah, who was associated with the mound, created the world simply by envisioning and naming all things in it.[30] To some degree these myths represent competing theologies, but they can also be seen as representing different aspects of the process of creation.[31]
Another story central to Egyptian belief was the myth of Osiris and Isis.[32] It tells of the fertility god Osiris, ruler of the world, who was murdered and dismembered by his jealous brother Set,[33] a god often associated with chaos.[34] Osiris' sister and wife Isis then reassembled Osiris' body and resurrected him so that he could conceive an heir to take back the throne from Set.[35] Osiris then entered the underworld and became the ruler of the dead,[36] while Isis eventually gave birth to his son Horus. Once grown, Horus fought and defeated Set to become king himself. Set's association with chaos, and the identification of Osiris and Horus as the rightful rulers, provided a rationale for pharaonic succession and portrayed the pharaohs as the upholders of order.[37] At the same time, Osiris' death and rebirth were related to the Egyptian agricultural cycle, in which crops grew in the wake of the Nile inundation,[38][39] and provided a template for the resurrection of human souls after death.[40]
The sun god Ra was essential to life on earth, and was thus among the most important gods.[41] In myth, the movement of the sun across the sky was explained as Ra traveling in a barque, and the setting of the sun was regarded as Ra's entry into the underworld, through which he journeyed during the night.[42] While in the underworld, Ra met with Osiris, who again acted as a god of resurrection, so that his life was renewed. He also fought each night with Apep, a serpentine god representing chaos. The defeat of Apep and the meeting with Osiris insured the rising of the sun the next morning, an event that represented rebirth and the victory of order over chaos.[43]

Like many cultures, the Egyptians prayed to their gods for help, although there are few written prayers that predate the Nineteenth Dynasty. There are also many formal hymns praising particular deities or the pharaoh. These poems consist of short lines organized into couplets or triplets, and were probably recited, or possibly even sung, during religious ceremonies. They often included mention of many different aspects of the deity whom they addressed, and expounded on his or her nature and mythological function. Thus, they are important sources of information on Egyptian theology.[44]

Among the most significant and extensively preserved Egyptian writings are funerary texts designed to insure that deceased souls reached a pleasant afterlife.[45] The earliest of these are the Pyramid Texts, the oldest religious writings in the world.[46] They consisted of almost a thousand spells, or "utterances," which were inscribed on the walls of royal pyramids during the Old Kingdom. During the First Intermediate Period, a new body of funerary spells, which included material from the Pyramid Texts, began appearing in coffins and on tomb walls. This collection of writings is known as the Coffin Texts, and was not reserved for royalty, but also appeared in the tombs of nonroyal officials. The Coffin Texts in turn were major sources for a number of New Kingdom writings, including the Book of the Dead[47], which were copied on papyrus and sold to ordinary citizens, to be placed in their tombs.[48]
The Coffin Texts were also the first texts to include detailed descriptions of the Egyptian underworld and instructions on how to overcome its hazards.[49] The writings on this subject seem to have developed from earlier "Underworld Books" kept in temple libraries.[50] In the New Kingdom several separate texts of this type developed, including the Book of Gates, the Book of Caverns and the Amduat, which were placed in royal tombs.[51][52]


Temples to the gods existed from the earliest periods of Egyptian history, and at the height of the civilization were present in almost every town.[53] These included both mortuary temples to serve the spirits of deceased pharaohs and temples 
