Badger Badger Badger
"Badger Badger Badger", "The Badger Song" or "Badgers" is a Flash cartoon by British animator Jonti Picking. It consists of images of badgers doing calisthenics, a toadstool in front of a tree, and a snake in the desert. Accompanied by electronic music, a voice repeats the word "badger" over the animation, breaking off to say either "mushroom" or "a snake" at the appropriate moments.[1]
The cartoon, published 2 September 2003, loops indefinitely. The first two badger scenes contain twelve badgers; subsequent badger scenes contain eleven badgers. After a long running time, the song becomes out of sync with the animation.
The cartoon brought Picking to the attention of MTV Europe, for whom Picking produced Weebl and Bob.[1] That cartoon series, together with the dancing badgers, helped Picking's website Weebl's Stuff win a People's Choice award from users of Yahoo! in the UK.[2] "Badger Badger Badger" was also listed as one of the top five internet fads of all time by PC World.[3]

There have been several follow ups to the "Badger Badger Badger" cartoon posted to the Weebl's stuff website. A Halloween version of the cartoon, "Badgers 2" was created in 2003 and features zombie badgers on a black background with a scratching sound added to the music.[4] A Christmas-themed version, with badgers dressed in Santa outifts, is also available.[5] "Badgers On A Plane" consists of a scene from a Snakes On a Plane trailer that includes badgers and a mushroom, which have been digitally edited into the scene, tumbling from their seats while a bit of the song plays in the background.[6] In 2007, "Big Ass Badgers" was released to spoof the Transformers film.[7] Also in 2007, a live action version of the cartoon called "Baby Badgers" was released to promote the new Badger toys.[8]
A "Euro 2004 Edition" was also created during the UEFA Euro 2004 football championship, where the badgers wore England football jerseys to "footy, footy, footy" and "England! England! Goal! A goal! Oh, it's a goal, scored by England, England..."[9]
An unofficial Harry Potter edition was also made in 2005. The badgers were replaced by characters from the Harry Potter series and the lyrics were changed to "Potter, Potter, Potter", "Weasley!, Weasley!" and "Snape! Oh, it's a Snape!"[10]







