List of Christian denominations
List of Christian denominations (or Denominations self-identified as Christian) ordered by historical and doctrinal relationships. (See also: Christianity; Christian denominations).
Some groups are large (e.g. Catholics, Lutherans, Anglicans or Baptists), while others are just a few small churches, and in most cases the relative size is not evident in this list. Also, modern movements such as Fundamentalist Christianity, Pietism, Evangelicalism, Pentecostalism and the Holiness movement sometimes cross denominational lines, or in some cases create new denominations out of two or more continuing groups, (as is the case for many United and uniting churches, for example). Such subtleties and complexities are not clearly depicted here. Additionally, some groups viewed by non-adherents as denominational actively resist being called a "denomination" and do not have any formal denominational structure, authority, or record-keeping beyond the local congregation; several groups within Restorationism fall into this category.


These are the churches which claim continuity (based upon Apostolic Succession) with the church before separation into Greek or Eastern and Latin or Western. (Lutheran churches have also identified themselves as catholic on the basis of continuity in doctrine with the Early Church.)


The Latin Rite or Church[2] is the largest and most widely known of the 22 Rites of the Catholic Church. In the past, Catholics in France and Germany have claimed a measure of ecclesial independence from Rome (see Febronianism, Gallicanism), but not to the extent of forming Churches distinct from the Roman Catholic Church as a whole (as happened with the Church of England) or even from the Latin Church.

All of the following are particular churches of the Catholic Church. They are all in communion with the Bishop of Rome and acknowledge his claim of universal jurisdiction and authority. They have some minor distinct theological emphases and expressions (for instance, in the case of those that are of Greek/Byzantine tradition, concerning some aspects of the Latin depiction of purgatory).[3]
The Roman Catholic Church considers itself part of the One Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ founded.[4]

Anglicanism has referred to itself as the via media between Roman Catholicism and Protestantism.
The Anglican Communion also includes the following united churches:
The Anglican Communion considers itself to be part of the One Holy catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ founded, which also includes the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox Churches, and the Old Catholic Church (Union of Utrecht).

List provided in order of precedence. Indentation indicates autonomy rather than autocephaly.
The Eastern Orthodox Church considers itself to be the One Holy catholic and Apostolic Church that Christ founded.

Oriental Orthodoxy comprises those Christians who did not accept the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451). Other denominations often erroneously label these churches "Monophysite", however, as the Oriental Orthodox do not adhere to the teachings of Eutyches, they themselves reject this label, preferring the term Miaphysite.
The Oriental Orthodox Church considers itself to be the One Holy Catholic Orthodox and Apostolic Church that Christ founded.

The Assyrian Church of the East is said to have been formed by St Thomas. The Church did not attend the Council of Ephesus (AD 431). It is incorrectly referred to as Nestorianism; Assyrian Christians do not consider themselves Nestorians, and recent Christological agreements with the Catholic and some of the Orthodox churches have resolved this debate permanently, clearing the way for union.



