Missing white woman syndrome
Missing White Woman Syndrome (MWWS) is a racist term for the disproportionately greater degree of coverage in television, radio, and print news reporting of a missing person case involving a young, attractive, middle or upper middle class white woman, compared with cases concerning a missing male, or missing persons of other races or classes.[1][2][3] The essential features of a missing person said to give rise to Missing White Woman Syndrome are sex,[4] race or ethnicity, social class, (relative) prettiness, and age. These features are said to provoke discrimination in the reporting as news of the disappearance of a young white woman, and so to increase public interest in her disappearance.

The stereotypical kidnapping or abduction by a stranger is the cause of only a small fraction of the large figure of people reported missing. U.S. government research demonstrates that the victims of non-family abductions are at the highest risk of injury, sexual assault, or death. The majority of these victims are, in fact, female white juveniles.
Some 2,300 Americans are reported missing every day, including both adults and children. But only a small proportion of those are stereotypical abductions or kidnappings by a stranger. For example, the federal government counted 840,279 missing persons cases in 2001. All but about 50,000 were juveniles, classified as anyone younger than 18. About half of the roughly 800,000 missing juvenile cases in 2001 involved runaways, and another 200,000 were classified as family abductions related to domestic or custody disputes.
Only about 100 missing-child reports each year fit the profile of a stereotypical abduction by a stranger or vague acquaintance. Two-thirds of those victims are ages 12 to 17, and among those eight out of 10 are white females, according to a Justice Department study. Nearly 90 percent of the abductors are men, and they sexually assault their victims in half of the cases.
To further complicate categorization of cases, the FBI designates some missing-person incidents—both adult and juvenile—that seem most dire as "endangered" or "involuntary."
[Kym] Pasqualini [National Center for Missing Adults President] said the media tends to focus on "damsels in distress"—typically, affluent young white women and teenagers. The media's dilemma is that government research shows that victims of nonfamily abductions and stereotypical kidnappings are most at risk of injury, sexual assault or death. "Damsel" cases may be the exception, but they often are the most urgent. [5]

In Britain, the organization known as "Missing People", a charity formerly called the National Missing Persons Helpline has drawn attention to its own view of the degree to which the news media devote attention to vulnerable missing persons, claiming that despite its efforts to generate news coverage for all missing persons cases, the news media themselves will cover only those cases that fit their publications.
Missing People claims that the cases which generate greatest publicity are those where missing persons are white, middle-class, female and from stable two-parent families, and where there is no indication that such a missing person ran away from home. Two cases are given as contrasting examples: the murder of Hannah Williams and the murder of Danielle Jones.
Although in each case the victim was a white female teenager, there was more coverage of the case of Jones than that of Williams. It is suggested that this is because Jones fulfilled the criteria of being a model middle-class schoolgirl, whilst Williams, a girl with a working-class background whose parents were estranged and who had a stud in her nose, did not.[6]
Jewkes[7] agrees, asserting that the likelihood of the UK national news media lending their weight to the search for a missing person, whether foul play is suspected or not, depends on a collection of interrelated factors: whether the person is young, female, white, middle-class, and conventionally attractive.
A working-class boy or an older woman is less likely to receive news coverage. Even in cases where foul play is suspected, if the victim is male, is of Afro-Caribbean or Asian descent, is a prostitute, has drug problems, is a persistent runaway, or has been in foster care, reporters are said to decide that their readership is less likely to relate to or empathize with the victim, and they reduce their coverage accordingly.
In addition to the cases chosen as examples of their theory by Missing People, Jewkes cites the murder of Amanda Dowler, the murder of Sarah Payne, and the Soham murders as examples of "eminently newsworthy stories" about attractive girls from "respectable" middle-class families and backgrounds whose parents used the news media effectively. She claims, controversially, that in contrast, the street murder of Damilola Taylor (not in fact a case of a missing person) initially received little news coverage, with reports initially concentrating upon street crime levels and community policing, and largely ignoring the victim.
Even when the victim's father flew into the UK from Nigeria to make press statements and television appearances, the level of public outcry did not reach, Jewkes asserts (in her words) "the near hysterical outpourings of anger and sadness that accompanied the deaths of Sarah, Milly, Holly, and Jessica".[7]
The National Center for Missing Adults has also commented on the phenomenon by saying "Unless it's a pretty girl aged 20 to 35, the media exposure is just not there."[8]

The following missing person cases have been used as examples of what has been claimed to be Missing White Woman Syndrome:



Critics contend that the following examples of missing people received disproportionately little coverage compared with MWWS cases:

Critics have also pointed to media bias in the example of Jessica Lynch versus the coverage of Shoshana Johnson and Lori Piestewa. All three were ambushed in the same attack during the Iraq War on March 23, 2003, but Piestewa and Johnson received less coverage than Lynch.
Media critics suggest that Lynch's story was promoted because Lynch was a more palatable and identifiable figure to promote: a young, blonde white woman. Johnson, on the other hand, was a black woman and a single mother.[32]
Piestewa, also a single mother, was a Native American from an impoverished background.[33] Lynch criticized this disproportionate coverage focusing only on her, stating in a congressional testimony before the United States House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform:


