Silicon
bluish-tinged faces

Silicon (pronounced /ˈsɪlɨkən/, Latin: silicium) is the most common metalloid. It is a chemical element, which has the symbol Si and atomic number 14. The atomic mass is 28.0855. A tetravalent metalloid, silicon is less reactive than its chemical analog carbon. As the eighth most common element in the universe by mass, silicon very rarely occurs as the pure free element in nature, but is more widely distributed in dusts, planetoids and planets as various forms of silicon dioxide (silica) or silicates. On Earth, silicon is the second most abundant element (after oxygen) in the crust,[1] making up 25.7% of the crust by mass.
Silicon has many industrial uses. Elemental silicon is the principal component of most semiconductor devices, most importantly integrated circuits or microchips. Silicon is widely used in semiconductors because it remains a semiconductor at higher temperatures than the semiconductor germanium and because its native oxide is easily grown in a furnace and forms a better semiconductor/dielectric interface than any other material.
In the form of silica and silicates, silicon forms useful glasses, cements, and ceramics. It is also a constituent of silicones, a class-name for various synthetic plastic substances made of silicon, oxygen, carbon and hydrogen, often confused with silicon itself.
Silicon is an essential element in biology, although only tiny traces of it appear to be required by animals[citation needed]. It is much more important to the metabolism of plants, particularly many grasses, and silicic acid (a type of silica) forms the basis of the striking array of protective shells of the microscopic diatoms.

The outer electron orbitals (half filled subshell holding up to eight electrons) have the same structure as in carbon and the two elements are sometimes similar chemically. Even though it is a relatively inert element, silicon still reacts with halogens and dilute alkalis, but most acids (except for some hyper-reactive combinations of nitric acid and hydrofluoric acid) do not affect it. Having four bonding electrons however gives it, like carbon, many opportunities to combine with other elements or compounds under the right circumstances.
Both silicon and (in certain aspects) carbon are semiconductors, readily either donating or sharing their four outer electrons allowing many different forms of chemical bonding. Pure silicon has a negative temperature coefficient of resistance, since the number of free charge carriers increases with temperature. The electrical resistance of single crystal silicon significantly changes under the application of mechanical stress due to the piezoresistive effect.
In its crystalline form, pure silicon has a gray color and a metallic luster. It is similar to glass in that it is rather strong, very brittle, and prone to chipping.

Silicon was first identified by Antoine Lavoisier in 1787 (as a component of the Latin silex, silicis for flint, flints), and was later mistaken by Humphry Davy in 1800 for a compound. In 1811 Gay-Lussac and Thénard probably prepared impure amorphous silicon through the heating of potassium with silicon tetrafluoride. In 1824, Berzelius prepared amorphous silicon using approximately the same method as Lussac. Berzelius also purified the product by repeatedly washing it.[2]

Measured by mass, silicon makes up 25.7% of the Earth's crust and is the second most abundant element in the crust, after oxygen. Pure silicon crystals are very rarely found in nature; they can be found as inclusions with gold and in volcanic exhalations. Silicon is usually found in the form of silicon dioxide (also known as quartz), and other more complex silicate minerals.
Silica occurs in minerals consisting of (practically) pure silicon dioxide in different crystalline forms. Amethyst, agate, quartz, rock crystal, chalcedony, flint, jasper, and opal are some of the forms in which silicon dioxide appears. Biogenic silica occurs in the form of diatoms, radiolaria and siliceous sponges.
Silicon also occurs as silicate minerals (various minerals containing silicon, oxygen and one or another metal), for example the feldspar group. These minerals occur in clay, sand and various types of rock such as granite and sandstone. Feldspar, pyroxene, amphibole, and mica are a few of the many common silicate mineral groups.
Silicon is a principal component of many meteorites, and also is a component of obsidian and tektites, which are natural forms of glass.
See also Category:Silicate minerals

Silicon has numerous known isotopes, with mass numbers ranging from 22 to 44. 28Si (the most abundant isotope, at 92.23%), 29Si (4.67%), and 30Si (3.1%) are stable; 32Si is a radioactive isotope produced by cosmic ray spallation of argon. Its half-life has been determined to be approximately 170 years (0.21 MeV), and it decays by beta - emission to 32P (which has a 14.28 day half-life )[3] and then to 32S.

Silicon forms binary compounds called silicides with many metallic elements whose properties range from reactive compounds e.g. magnesium silicide , Mg2Si through to high melting refractory compounds such as molybdenum disilicide, MoSi2.[4] Silicon carbide, SiC, (carborundum) is a hard, high melting solid and is the well known abrasive. Silane, SiH4, is a pyrophoric gas with a similar tetrahedral structure to methane, CH4. Additionally there is a range of catenated silicon hydrides that form a homologous series of compounds, SinH2n+2 where n = 2-8 (analogous to the alkanes).[5] These are all readily hydrolysed and are thermally unstable, particularly the heavier members.[5] Disilenes contain a silicon-silicon double bond (analogous to the alkenes) and are generally highly reactive requiring large substituent groups to stabilise them.[6] A disilyne with a silicon-silicon triple bond was first isolated in 2004, although as the compound is non-linear, the bonding is dissimilar to that in alkynes.[7] Tetrahalides, SiX4, are formed with all of the halogens.[4] Silicon tetrachloride for example readily reacts with water unlike its carbon analogue, carbon tetrachloride.[5] Silicon dihalides are formed by the high temperature reaction of tetrahalides and silicon, with a structure analogous to a carbene they are reactive compounds. [5] Silicon difluoride condenses to form a polymeric compound, (SiF2)n.[5] Silicon dioxide, is a high melting solid with a number of different crystal forms the most familiar of which is the mineral quartz.[4] In quartz each silicon atom is surrounded by four oxygen atoms that bridge to other silicon atoms to form a three dimensional lattice.[4] Silica is soluble in water at high temperatures forming monosilicic acid (Si(OH)4)[5] and this property is used in the manufacture of quartz crystals used in electronics. ,[4]
Under the right conditions monosilicic acid readily polymerises to form more complex silicic acids, ranging from the simplest condensate, disilicic acid (H6Si2O7) to linear, ribbon, layer and lattice structures which form the basis of the many different silicate minerals.[5] Silicates are also important constituents of concretes.[4] With oxides of other elements the high temperature reaction of silicon dioxide can give a wide range of glasses with various properties.[5] Examples include soda lime glass, borosilicate glass and lead crystal glass. Silicon sulfide, SiS2 is a polymeric solid (unlike its carbon analogue the liquid CS2).[4] Silicon forms a nitride, Si3N4 which is a ceramic.[4] Silatranes, a group of tricyclic compounds containing five coordinate silicon may have physiological properties.[8] Many transition metal complexes containing a metal-silicon bond are now known, which include complexes containing, SiHnX3-n ligands, SiX3 ligands, Si(OR)3 ligands.[8] Silicones are large group of polymeric compounds with an (Si-O-Si) backbone an example is the silicone oil, PDMS, polydimethylsiloxane).[4] These polymers can be crosslinked to produce resins and elestomers.[4] Many organosilicon compounds are known which contain a silicon-carbon single bond. Many of these are based on a central tetrahedral silicon atom and some are optically active when central chirality exists. Long chain polymers containing a silicon backbone are known for example polydimethysilylene (SiMe2)n.[9] Polycarbosilane, [(SiMe2)2CH2]n with a backbone containing a repeating -Si-Si-C unit is a precursor in the production of silicon carbide fibres.[9]

As the second most abundant element in the earth's crust, silicon is vital to the construction industry as a principal constituent of natural stone, glass, concrete and cement. Silicon's greatest impact on the modern world's economy and lifestyle has resulted from silicon wafers used as substrates in the manufacture of discrete electronic devices such as power transistors, and in the development of integrated circuits such as computer chips.

The largest application of pure silicon (metallurgical grade silicon), representing about 55% of the world consumption, is in the manufacture of aluminium-silicon alloys to produce cast parts, mainly for the automotive industry. Silicon is an important constituent of electrical steel, modifying its resistivity and ferromagnetic properties. Silicon is added to molten cast iron as ferrosilicon or silicocalcium alloys to improve its performance in casting thin sections, and to prevent the formation of cementite at the surface.

Pure silicon is used to produce ultra-pure silicon wafers used in the semiconductor industry, in electronics and in photovoltaic applications. Ultra-pure silicon can be doped with other elements to adjust its electrical response by controlling the number and charge (positive or negative) of current carriers. Such control is necessary for transistors, solar cells, integrated circuits, microprocessors, semiconductor detectors and other semiconductor devices which are used in electronics and other high-tech a
