Psychiatry
Psychiatry is a medical specialty devoted to the treatment, study and prevention of mental disorders. The term was first coined by the German physician Johann Christian Reil in 1808.
Psychiatric assessment typically involves a mental status examination and the taking of a case history; and psychological tests may be conducted. Physical examinations may be carried out and on occasion neuroimages or other neurophysiological measurements taken. Diagnostic procedures vary. Official criteria are listed in manuals, the most widely available being the ICD from the World Health Organization and the DSM from the American Psychiatric Association.
Psychiatric medication is currently a central option, often in conjunction with one of the many varieties of psychotherapy. In extreme instances, currently less favored techniques such as electroconvulsive therapy may be used. Treatment is available on an inpatient or outpatient basis. With the necessary legal sanction, this may be applied involuntarily. Research and the clinical application of psychiatry are conducted on an interdisciplinary basis involving various sub-specialties and theoretical approaches. [4]
In the West, treatment of emotional and cognitive disfunction may be said to have its origins at least as far back as the 5th century BC. The first hospices for the mentally ill appeared in the Middle Ages. The early 19th century saw the development of psychiatry as a recognized field. Mental health institutions came to utilize more elaborate and, over the course of time, more humane treatment methods. The 19th century saw a huge increase in the number of patients.
The 20th century saw an upsurge of biological understanding of mental disorders, as well as the introduction of more systematic disease classification, and the advent of sophisticated psychiatric medication. An anti-psychiatry movement, hostile to most of the fundamental assumptions and practices of the discipline, emerged in the 1960s. A shift in emphasis in several Western societies led to the dismantling of state psychiatric hospitals in favor of more community-based treatment.

"Psychiatry, more than any other branch of medicine, forces its practitioners to wrestle with the nature of evidence, the validity of introspection, problems in communication, and other long-standing philosophical issues" (Guze, 1992, p.4).
The term psychiatry (ψυχιατρική), coined by Johann Christian Reil in 1808, comes from the Greek “ψυχή” (soul or mind) and “ιατρός" (healer or doctor).[5][6][7] It refers to a field of medicine focused specifically on the mind, aiming to study, prevent, and treat mental disorders in humans.[8][9][10] It has been described as an intermediary between the world from a social context and the world from the perspective of those who are mentally ill.[11]
Those who practice psychiatry are different than most other mental health professionals and physicians in that they must be familiar with both the social and biological sciences.[12] The discipline is interested in the operations of different organs and body systems as classified by the patient's subjective experiences and the objective physiology of the patient.[13] Psychiatry exists to treat mental disorders which are conventionally divided into three very general categories; mental illness, severe learning disability, and personality disorder.[14] While the focus of psychiatry has changed little throughout time, the diagnostic and treatment processes have evolved dramatically and continue to do so. Since the late 20th century, the field of psychiatry has continued to become more biological and less conceptually isolated from the field of medicine.[15]

While the medical specialty of psychiatry utilizes research in the field of neuroscience, psychology, medicine, biology, biochemistry, and pharmacology,[4] it has generally been considered a middle ground between neurology and psychology.[16] Unlike other physicians and neurologists, psychiatrists specialize in the doctor-patient relationship and are trained to varying extents in the use of psychotherapy and other therepautic communication techniques.[16] Psychiatrists also differ from psychologists in that they are physicians and the entirety of their post-graduate training is revolved around the field of medicine.[17] Psychiatrists can therefore counsel patients, prescribe medication, order laboratory tests, utilize neuroimaging in a research setting, and conduct physical examinations.[18]

Like other professions, the World Psychiatric Association issues an ethical code to govern the conduct of psychiatrists. The psychiatric code of ethics, first set forth through the Declaration of Hawaii in 1977, has been expanded through a 1983 Vienna update and, in 1996, the broader Madrid Declaration. The code was further revised in Hamburg, 1999. The World Psychiatric Association code covers such matters as patient assessment, up-to-date knowledge, the human dignity of incapacitated patients, confidentiality, research ethics, sex selection, euthanasia,[19] organ transplantation, torture,[20][21] the death penalty, media relations, genetics, and ethnic or cultural discrimination.[22] In establishing such ethical codes, the profession has responded to a number of controversies about the practice of psychiatry.

Various subspecialties and/or theoretical approaches exist which are related to the field of psychiatry. They include the following:
In the United States, psychiatry is one of the specialties which qualify for further education and board-certification in pain medicine, palliative medicine, and sleep medicine.

Psychiatric illnesses can be approached in a number of different ways. The biomedical approach examines signs and symptoms and compares them with diagnostic criteria. However psychiatric illness can also be assessed through a narrative which tries to understand symptoms as a part of a meaningful life history and as a responses to external conditions. Both approaches are important in the field of psychiatry.[24] A lack of consensus between these often opposing view has contributed in part to the biopsychiatry controversy. It has also played a role in controversies over specific psychiatric illness, such as ADHD and Multiple personalities.
Similar to other areas of medicine the Biopsychosocial model is often used.


Starting in the 5th century BC, mental disorders, especially those with psychotic traits, were considered supernatural in origin.[25] This view existed throughout ancient Greece and Rome.[25] Early manuals written about mental disorders were created by the Greeks.[26] In 4th century BC, Hippocrates theorized that physiological abnormalities may be the root of mental disorders.[25] However further explorations of this perspective ceased shortly thereafter following the fall of the Roman Empire.[25] Religious leaders and others returned to using early versions of exorcisms to treat mental disorders which often utilized cruel, harsh, and other barbarous methods.[25]

The first psychiatric hospitals were built in the medieval Islamic world from the 8th century. The first was built in Baghdad in 705, followed by Fes in the early 8th century, and Cairo in 800. Unlike medieval Christian physicians who relied on demonological explanations for mental illness, medieval Muslim physicians relied mostly on clinical observations. They made significant advances to psychiatry and were the first to provide psychotherapy and moral treatment for mentally ill patients, in addition to other forms of treatment such as baths, drug medication, music therapy and occupational therapy. In the 10th century, the Persian physician Muhammad ibn Zakarīya Rāzi (Rhazes) combined psychological methods and physiological explanations to provide treatment to mentally ill patients. His contemporary, the Arab physician Najab ud-din Muhammad, first described a number of mental illnesses such as agitated depression, neurosis, priapism and sexual impotence (Nafkhae Malikholia), psychosis (Kutrib), and mania (Dual-Kulb).[27]
In the 11th century, another Persian physician Avicenna recognized 'physiological psychology' in the treatment of illnesses involving emotions, and developed a system for associating changes in the pulse rate with inner feelings, which is seen as a precursor to the word association test developed by Carl Jung in the 19th century.[28] Avicenna was also an early pioneer of neuropsychiatry, and first described a number of neuropsychiatric conditions such as hallucination, insomnia, mania, nightmare, melancholia, dementia, epilepsy, paralysis, stroke, vertigo and tremor.[29]
Psychiatric hospitals were built in medieval Europe from the 13th century to treat mental disorders but were utilized only as custodial institutions and did not provide any type of treatment.[30] Founded in the 13th century, Bethlem Royal Hospital in London is one of the oldest psychiatric hospitals.[30] By 1547 the City of London acquired the hospital and continued its function until 1948.[31]

In 1656, Louis XIV of France created a public system of hospitals for those suffering from mental disorders, but as in England, no real treatment was being applied.[31] In 1758 English physician William Battie wrote the Treatise on Madness which called for treatments to be utilized in asylums.[32] Thirty years later the new ruling monarch in England, George III, was known to be suffering from a mental disorder.[25] Following the King's remission in 1789, mental illness was seen as something which could be treated and cured.[25] By 1792 French physician Philippe Pinel introduced humane treatment approaches to those suffering from mental disorders.[25] William Tuke adopted the methods outlined by Pinel and that same year Tuke opened the York Retreat in England.[25] That institution became known as a model throughout the world for humane and moral treatment of patients suffering from mental disorders.[33] It inspired similar institutions in the United States, most notably the Brattleboro Retreat and the Hartford Retreat (now the Institute of Living).

At the turn of the century, England and France combined only had a few hundred individuals in asylums.[34] By the late 1890s and early 1900s, this number skyrocketed to the hundreds of thousands.[34] The United States housed 150,000 patients in mental hospitals by 1904.[34] German speaking countries housed more than 400 public and private sector asylums.[34] These asylums were critical to the evolution of psychiatry as they provided a universal platform of practice throughout the world.[34]
Universities often played a part in the administration of the asylums.[35] Due to the relationship between the universities and asylums, scores of competitive psychiatrists were being molded in Germany.[35] Germany became known as the world leader in psychiatry during the nineteenth century.[34] The country possessed more than 20 separate universities all competing with each other for scientific advancement.[34] However, because of Germany's individual states and the lack of national regulation of asylums, the country had no organized centralization of asylums or psychiatry.[34] Britain, like Germany, also lacked a centralized organization for the administration of asylums.[36] This deficit hindered the diffusion of new ideas in medicine and psychiatry.[36]
In the United States in 1834, Anna Marsh, a physician's widow, deeded the funds to build her country's first financially-stable private asylum. The Brattleboro Retreat marked the beginning of America's private psychiatric hospitals challenging state institutions for patients, funding, and influence. Although based on England's York Retreat, it would be followed by speciality institutions of every treatment philosophy.
In 1838, France enacted a law to regulate both the admissions into asylums and asylum services across the country.[37] By 1840, asylums as therapeutic institutions existed throughout Europe and the United States.[38]
However, the new and dominating ideas that mental illness could be "conquered" during the mid-nineteenth century all came crashing down.[38] Psychiatrists and asylums were being pressured by an ever increasing patient population.[38] The average number of patients in asylums in the United States jumped 927%.[38] Numbers were similar in England and Germany.[38] Overcrowding was rampant in France where asylums would commonly take in double their maximum capacity.
