Travel 2.0
Travel 2.0, was used as early as December 2003 on a posting on the Planeta Web 2.0 Discussion Forum[1] and is an offshoot of the Web 2.0 phenomenon. Like many other industries, the online travel industry is currently in transition, adapting to new technologies and trends available on the Internet.[2] Travelers, for their part, are becoming increasingly more interested in finding the opinions and reviews of their fellow travelers in lieu of professional travel advice.[3] . This impact is significant given the travel sector's economic influence on the Internet, indeed more money is spent on travel than anything else online. Roughly two-thirds of Americans research and plan travel online and approximately the same amount book online as well.[4] The online travel industry breaks down into several different categories: online travel agents, online travel guides, online travel planners, and online travel communities and forums.[5] Together, these four groups make up the bulk of what are considered Travel 2.0 companies.
Travel 2.0 is a term that represents the extension and customization of the concept of Web 2.0 into a form that applies to the world’s largest industry: travel and tourism. It defines a transformation of online offerings into a new level of user empowerment and functionality. More than “Move to the Internet” as a platform, though, it is about how business forces that characterized Web 1.0 are yielding power, influence and eyeballs to the socially oriented Web 2.0. For Web 2.0, Tim O’Reilly described the following new models or different approaches that illustrated the divide between 2.0 and 1.0. [6]

The world has seen a migration of technical capabilities from slow, single process chips, 1200 baud modems, big, heavy monitors, and expensive memory and storage to dual core processors, DSL and cable modems with broad market penetration, cheap memory and storage and flat screen monitors. This has enabled Web democracy, allowing the presence of a one-person site to be as influential as a mass media outlet. The result is an online social revolution where friends and strangers can connect, share and communicate.
As described in 2006 by Philip Wolf, president and CEO of PhoCusWright Inc., [7], a travel research firm, Travel 2.0 as built on Web 2.0, is defined by five key tenets:
Or in short:
The foundation for and the technical migration from "your father’s Web" to present day Web 2.0 looks like this:
Travel 2.0 is the deployment of personal and business Web sites that embrace the above tenets and are built on the illustrated technology foundation. Some examples are Farecast, TravelPod, and Starwood Hotels. Travel 2.0 is a natural outcome of Web 2.0, as the following table illustrates (Web 2.0 elements are from Tim O'Reilly's Web 2.0 article):
Even while Travel 2.0 matures, Travel 3.0 is beginning to emerge. In this case, rather than following the trends of the overall Web (Travel 2.0 built on Web 2.0), the travel element is leading, providing the proving grounds for Web 3.0.


