BBC iPlayer
BBC iPlayer (formerly known as Integrated Media Player (iMP),[2][3] Interactive Media Player,[4] and MyBBCPlayer[5]) is a service available via website, P2P, cable television, and several mobile devices developed by the BBC to extend its existing RealPlayer-based "Radio Player" and other streamed video clip content. BBC iPlayer left Beta and went live on 25 December 2007.[6] On 25 June 2008, it was announced that a new-look iPlayer would be launched.[7] The technology and infrastructure for iPlayer is provided by Kontiki, Siemens IT Solutions and Services, and Red Bee Media.

The original iPlayer service was launched in October 2005, undergoing a five month long trial of five thousand broadband users until 28 February 2006. The iPlayer came under criticism for the delay in launch, rebranding and cost to BBC licence-fee payers, as no finished product had been released after four years of development.[8] A new, improved iPlayer service then had another very limited user trial which began on 15 November 2006.
The iPlayer received the approval of the BBC Trust on 30 April 2007, and an open beta for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 was launched at midnight on 27 July 2007, where it was announced that only a fixed number of people would be able to sign up for the service, with a controlled increase in users over the summer.[9]
The BBC has also been criticised for saying that the iPlayer would 'launch' on the 27 July 2007, when what was on offer was simply an extension of the beta to an open beta, admitting more users in a controlled manner.[10] This was done reportedly to allow British ISPs and the BBC to gauge the effect of the iPlayer traffic on the Internet within the UK, although Channel 4 and ITV had both recently launched similar services.
The open beta incorporated a media player, an electronic programme guide (EPG) and specially designed download client, and will allow the download of TV content by computers assigned to a United Kingdom-based IP address, for use up to thirty days after broadcast. However, it was only available to users of Windows XP.
This was a controversial decision by the BBC, which led to a petition being posted on 10 Downing Street's e-petition website.[11] The petition reached 16,082 signatures on 20 August 2007. The response from the Government was:
... the Trust noted the strong public demand for the service to be available on a variety of operating systems. The BBC Trust made it a condition of approval for the BBC's on-demand services that the iPlayer is available to users of a range of operating systems, and has given a commitment that it will ensure that the BBC meets this demand as soon as possible. They will measure the BBC's progress on this every six months and publish the findings.[12][13]
On 16 October 2007, the BBC announced that a strategic relationship with Adobe, that would bring a limited, streaming-only version of the iPlayer to Mac and Linux users, as well as Windows users who cannot or do not wish to use the iPlayer download service.[14] The streaming service was launched on 13 December 2007.[15] Most programmes can only be viewed for up to seven days after broadcast, unlike the thirty days provided by the download service.[15]
Since January 2008 it has supported Mozilla Firefox (only under the Microsoft Windows platform) for downloading content.[16]
Before the iPlayer had even launched, it was announced that the BBC, alongside ITV and Channel 4, were intending to launch a new video on demand platform, provisionally named Kangaroo. It is intended that it will complement the video on demand services that these channels are already offering, including the iPlayer, by making programmes available once their "catch up" period expires.[17]
Following a deal between the BBC and cable television provider Virgin Media, the iPlayer service was made available through the provider's on demand service.[18] The cable service launched on 30 April 2008,[19] and keeps the look and feel of the BBC iPlayer program.[19]
In response to a Freedom of Information Act request, the BBC stated that the iPlayer cost £6 million to develop up to 8 April 2008.[20]
On 23 August 2008, a new feature, Series Stacking, was announced.[21] This feature started being rolled out on 13 September 2008, and allows viewers to watch previous programmes from selected series until the series has ended, with a limit of up to thirteen weeks after first broadcast.[22] Not all programmes will form part of the stack, however. The BBC Trust has permitted 15% of content to be offered as part of the stacking service; soaps, news bulletins and review-based programmes will not be stacked, as well as programmes containing material of a legal nature, such as Crimewatch.
On 19 December 2008, the BBC released, as part of the iPlayer Labs feature, iPlayer Desktop for Mac and Linux operating systems.[23][24][25]
On 20 April 2009, the BBC incorporated high-definition streams and downloads of some content on the iPlayer. There are plans to roll out the HD streams to devices such as the Virgin Set Top Box and PlayStation 3, but no date has yet been set.


One of the key features of the iPlayer download service is the use of peer-to-peer technology to enable the distribution of large video files (i.e. TV programmes) to scale effectively. Once downloaded, the content is only playable within the iPlayer itself or Windows Media Player 10 or 11, and digital rights management (DRM) software will prevent it being directly copied to another medium (e.g. another computer or CD-ROM). Additionally, the DRM allows the BBC to decide how long the programmes remain watchable. Programmes will be available for download for seven days following broadcast. Once a programme is downloaded a user will have thirty days to start watching it. Once a user starts to watch a programme, it will continue to be available for the next seven days. These limitations do not apply to viewers using the online streaming service.
There has been criticism levelled at the iPlayer's use of KService from Kontiki, the peer-to-peer application which continues to use users' bandwidth, even after the iPlayer has been shut down,[26] though this can be controlled using options available within the software. Because of this, users may be charged by their Internet service provider for exceeding their download limit or fair use policy.[27]
The client also offers an electronic programme guide (EPG) with listings for both the previous seven and next seven days' programmes; selecting a programme which has already been broadcast will begin downloading it immediately, while those not yet shown will be downloaded as soon as they have been. It is currently not possible to schedule a series to be automatically downloaded when the next episode becomes available, but the BBC hopes to make this available in a later version.[28] Once downloaded, the client requests a key from the BBC server to unlock the content before playback. It will only be usable to computers using a UK-based IP address,[29] although AOL users may have to log-on several times due to routing issues.[citation needed] If using an IP address not based in the UK, the user can select shows to download, but the download will fail with a notification that the user is not in the UK. Some have bypassed this restriction by using UK based proxies, for example a university VPN.[citation needed]

The BBC's streaming version of iPlayer, which makes use of Adobe Flash software, launched on 13 December 2007.[30] The BBC made use of the Christmas period to trumpet the new service with the tagline 'Making the unmissable... unmissable', and the service came out of beta on the 25 December 2007.[6] Also, seasonal specials were followed routinely throughout the Christmas week with plugs for iPlayer.[31] The streaming version of iPlayer offers replays of programmes broadcast on all BBC TV channels during the last seven days.[32] Programmes are available from all national BBC television channels as well as BBC Wales programmes shown on S4C.[32] Due to licensing agreements, international and some privately-produced shows or movies are not available on iPlayer.[33]
Perhaps what sets the streaming iPlayer aside from other net-based 'TV catchup' services, such as Channel 4's 4oD service, is its smooth compatibility with computers using Linux and Mac operating systems, as Adobe Flash Player is also available on those platforms.[34]


On 30 April 2008 the iPlayer service was pumped directly to Virgin Media's 3.4m digital cable TV customers as part of the company's video-on-demand service. Pressing the 'red button' while watching a BBC channel on TV will bring up the iPlayer service without the user having to access the web.[35]
On 29 May 2008 Virgin Media successfully integrated iPlayer with the Virgin Media electronic programme guide. The majority of BBC shows are now listed alongside other VOD content in Virgin's Catch Up TV section as well as through the red button whilst viewing a BBC channel. There will be no charge for watching BBC shows through the iPlayer on Virgin Media.[36]
As of 21 July 2008, iPlayer on Virgin Media had received 10.5 million views since its official launch on 1 June 2008.[37] On 26 September 2008 it was revealed that one third of all iPlayer programme views were accessed through Virgin Media.[38]

During March 2008 an unofficial Python script was released to allow Xbox's running XBMC to access the BBC iPlayer. [39]
On 9 April 2008 the BBC iPlayer was made available to stream video content on the Wii video game console via the Internet Channel (only available to UK residents).[40][41] This was enabled by a recoding of the iPlayer to use Flash 7 rather than Flash 9.
After the Wii content launch, iPlayer was not officially accessible at the standard iPlayer website through the PlayStation 3 browser. An unofficial hack was created a week after the Wii content launch, which combined Javascript, CSS and user-agent masking to mimic the Internet Channel browser, in turn allowing PlayStation 3 owners to access the iPlayer by visiting the unofficial website through its browser.[42] Whilst the BBC were "impressed", they remarked that it was not "the best possible iPlayer proposition for that console", and that, as the PS3 is on their roadmap, they would be "investigating the optimal video profile and browser proposition" for it in due course.[43] From December 2008, the PlayStation 3 was officially supported directly through the iPlayer website.[44]

BT has announced plans to charge its customers £3 per month for watching BBC Replay, a cut down version of iPlayer offering a more limited 30 hours of BBC programming per week. [45]


On 7 March 2008, a beta version for Apple's iPhone and iPod Touch was released. The version marked the first time the service became available on portable devices, allowing streaming over a wi-fi connection. The EDGE connectivity on the iPhone, however, is not supported, as it is too slow for streaming video.[46][47]
An exploit was soon discovered in this tailored content for the iPhone allowing users to bypass the DRM, download the files and play them on alternative devices. The BBC closed this hack on 13 March 2008. [48] Through the month of June 2008 the ongoing battle followed a tit for tat progress. A Ruby[49] exploit was followed by the BBC introducing XOR encryption on parts was followed by a circumvention of the encryption. It has been suggested the BBC introduced specially crafted web bugs and download chunk limits where an iPhone is not detected, reverting to the encryption if a genuine handset is detected. A cycle of updates and DRM circumvention has followed [50]

On 18 September 2008, the BBC announced that a version will become available to the Nokia N96 mobile phone as a download service to allow viewers to watch programmes even when they are out of reach of Wifi or 3G networks.[51][52] The launch date was set of 1 October 2008.
Shortly after on 9 September 2008, even before the BBC Nokia N96 download service had gone live, a method for independently downloading and playing the iPlayer N96 3GP stream on other mobiles, Linux and MacOS was published.[53][54]

iPlayer was updated to include streaming radio and television as well as extended to a variety of handsets in early December 2008 [55] including the Samsung Omnia, Sony Ericsson XPERIA X1 and Sony Ericsson C905.[56]

On the 25 June 2008, the BBC announced that they had been developing a new version of the iPlayer that is based on user feedback - it was then called "BBC iPlayer 2.0".[57] New features included combining the normal television iPlayer with the radio iPlayer, schedules of programmes due to be on the iPlayer, automatic resumption of the last programme watched, an increase in the size of the screen by 25% to 640 pixels wide, RSS feeds of iPlayer data, and a "Yesterday's TV" function.[57] The beta ran alongside the existing site until 3 July 2008, when a new version replaced it.[58]. Later versions have implemented an option of streaming videos in high quality.
A newer platform was launched at the end of 2008 which facilitated the use of the new BBC iPlayer Desktop (Replacement for Download Manager) as well as other "BBC iPlayer Labs" features such as adjustable video windows and user feedback options. As of March 2009, the BBC launched the new 1500kbps streaming version of the player which provides near TV quality pictures even when in full screen. The next significant release is expected to be iPlayer 3.0.

During the 2005 and 2006 iPlayer trials, the DRM system used was based on Microsoft's Windows Media DRM, which led to concerns about cross-platform availability, as this technology is only available for Windows XP. However, some users have managed to get it working using compatibility options in Vista.[59] The BBC emphasises that it "has a commitment to platform neutrality and a remit to make its content as widely available as possible",[60] and that while the initial trial used a Microsoft-based technology, they are constantly looking for new technologies which would enable them to relax the restriction: Ashley Highfield, the BBC's director of Future Media and Technology, has explained that "we have always started with the platform that reaches the most number of people and then rolled it out from there". They also point out that not all of the content delivered through the iPlayer will be subject to DRM - live streaming content, for instance, may not need the same level of control, presumably implying that players for Mac OS X and Linux systems could be developed with a restricted range of content. However, a project has been started to enable the iPlayer to work with other platforms via the Wine project.[61]
On 14 August 2007, the Free Software Foundation staged a demonstration outside BBC Television Centre.[62] The FSF's Peter T. Brown criticised the BBC for what he claimed was a break from previous tradition: the insistence that, for the first time, BBC viewers would be forced to use proprietary technology to watch BBC programmes.

Within three weeks of its official launch the BBC reported that over 3.5 million programmes[63] had been streamed or downloaded within two weeks of the release. The Observer described these figures as "remarkably promising".[64] The BBC originally planned for only half a million users within the first six months of the download service.[65] Streaming of programmes currently outnumbers downloads eight to one.[66]
This take up may be related to the significant "long tail" effect that the BBC has reported, with many users seeking out more niche interest programmes, and programmes broadcast on digital channels doing remarkably well.[64] However, this is expected to change with the introduction of booking programmes to download in advance, and automatic downloading of the next episode.
The demands of the iPlayer has met with some concern and criticism from UK ISPs due to the additional bandwidth the service will require.[67] Several ISPs, notably Tiscali, have called on the BBC to partially fund network upgrades to cope with iPlayer traffic. The BBC responded by saying that the iPlayer was dri
