Land of Oz
Oz is a fairy country (fantasy region) containing four lands under the rule of one monarch.
It was first introduced in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900) by L. Frank Baum, one of many fairy countries that he created for his books. It achieved a popularity that none of his other works attained, and after four years, he returned to it. The land was described and expanded upon in the Oz Books.[1] An attempt to cut off the production of the series with The Emerald City of Oz, by ending the story with Oz being isolated from the rest of the world, did not succeed owing to readers' reactions and Baum's financial need to write successful books.[2]
The land of Oz is depicted as real in the books, unlike the 1939 movie adaptation, which transformed it into an ambiguous dream of Dorothy's.[3]
In all, Baum wrote fourteen children's books about Oz and its odd inhabitants, as well as six shorter books intended for younger readers. After his death, Ruth Plumly Thompson and other writers continued the series.

In Baum's time, it was common for authors to present works of fiction as true accounts (compare Sherlock Holmes and Tarzan for other examples). While Baum presented Oz as fiction in some of his forewords such as that of the first book, in other books he presented it as a true account related to him by those involved. Most notably, in The Emerald City of Oz he attempted to end the series on the basis of a letter he had claimed to have received from Dorothy Gale, the main character. In the following book, The Patchwork Girl of Oz, he explained that after some difficulty he had re-established communication with the characters by wireless telegraph. Baum also began signing himself as "Royal Historian of Oz," a title which several other authors of the series have taken on after his death.
Because Baum himself wrote from an in-universe standpoint, many fans of the series treat the books as if they were true, known among the fans as the "Oz as History" standpoint. Any confusion or contradiction between the different versions of their histories is said to be the fault of the historian making an honest mistake, of the editors for removing parts which they did not consider suitable for the child audience, of the characters involved who reported the incidents in question back to the historian, or explained by the concept that many alternate versions of Oz co-exist simultaneously.
There are many discussions founded on clues in the series in Oz fan group Regalia[1] (and previously Nonestica[2] and the Ozzy Digest[3]) on how large Oz is, its population, and many other details not addressed explicitly in the books themselves. Articles of the sort frequently appear in The Baum Bugle as well.
While some fans enjoy trying to explain the various inconsistencies in the books, others prefer to ignore them, since apparently the inconsistencies weren't important to Baum himself. These fans prefer to view Oz from the contrasting, but more traditional, Oz as Literature standpoint. Many fans enjoy both standpoints, and it is not uncommon for new ideas about Oz to be examined from both standpoints by the same people.

Oz is, in the first book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, distinguished from Dorothy's native Kansas by not being civilized; this explains why Kansas does not have witches and wizards, while Oz does.[4] In the third book, Ozma of Oz, Oz is described as a "fairy country", new terminology that remained to explain its wonders.[5]


Oz is roughly rectangular in shape, and divided along the diagonals into four countries: Munchkin Country (but commonly referred to as 'Munchkinland' in adaptations) in the East, Winkie Country (called 'The Vinkus' in Gregory Maguire's Wicked and its sequel Son of a Witch) in the West, (sometimes West and East are reversed on maps of Oz, see West and East below) Gillikin Country in the North, and Quadling Country in the South. In the center of Oz, where the diagonals cross, is the fabled Emerald City, capital of the land of Oz and seat to the monarch of Oz, Princess Ozma.[6]
The regions have a color schema: blue for Munchkins, yellow for Winkies, red for Quadlings, green for the Emerald city, and (in works after the first) purple for the Gillikins, which region was also not named in the first book.[7] (This contrasts with Kansas; Baum, describing it, used "gray" nine times in four paragraphs.[8]) In The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, this is merely the favorite color, used for clothing and other man-made objects, and having some influence on their choice of crops, but the basic colors of the world are natural colors.[7] The effect is less consistent in later works. In The Marvelous Land of Oz, the book states that everything in the land of the Gillikins is purple, including the plants and mud, and a character can see that he is leaving when the grass turns from purple to green, but it also describes pumpkins as orange and corn as green in that land.[9] Baum, indeed, never used the color schema consistently; in many books, he alluded to the colors to orient the characters and readers to their location, and then did not refer to it again.[10] His most common technique was to depict the man-made articles and flowers as the color of the country, leaving leaves, grass, and fruit their natural colors.[11]
Most of these regions are settled with prosperous and contented people. However, this naturally is lacking in scope for plot. Numerous pockets throughout the land of Oz are cut off from the main culture, for geographic or cultural reasons. Many have never heard of Ozma, making it impossible for them to acknowledge her as their rightful queen. These regions are concentrated around the edges of the country, and constitute the main settings for books that are set entirely within Oz.[12] The Lost Princess of Oz, for instance is set entirely in rough country in Winkie Country, between two settled areas.[13] In Glinda of Oz, Ozma speaks of her duty to discover all these stray corners of Oz.[14]
In The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, a yellow brick road leads from the lands of the Munchkins to the Emerald City. Other such roads featured in other works: one from Gillikin Country in The Marvelous Land of Oz, and a second one from Munchkin Land in The Patchwork Girl of Oz.[15]
Oz is completely surrounded on all four sides by a desert, which insulates the citizens of Oz from discovery and invasion. In the first two books, this is merely a desert, with only its extent to make it dangerous to the traveler.[16] Indeed, in The Marvelous Land of Oz, Mombi tries to escape through it and Glinda chases her over the sands. Still, it is the dividing land between the magic of Oz and the outside world, and the Winged Monkeys can not obey Dorothy's command to carry her home because it would take them outside the lands of Oz.[17] In Ozma of Oz, it has become a magical desert, the Deadly Desert with life-destroying sands (no destruction is depicted in the Oz books, unlike in the film, Return to Oz), a feature that remained constant through the rest of the series.[18] The desert has nonetheless been breached numerous times, both by children from our world (mostly harmless), by the Wizard of Oz himself, and by more sinister characters, such as the Nome King, who attempted to conquer Oz. After such an attempt in The Emerald City of Oz, the book ends with Glinda creating a barrier of invisibility around the Land of Oz, for further protection.[19] This was, indeed, an earnest effort on Baum's part to escape the series, but the insistence of the readers meant the continuation of the series, and therefore the discovery of many ways for people to pass through this barrier as well as over the sands.[20] Despite this continual evasion, the barrier itself remained; nowhere in any Oz book did Baum hint that the inhabitants were even considering removing the magical barrier.[14]

The first known map of Oz was a glass slide used in Baum's Fairylogue and Radio-Play traveling show, showing the blue land of the Munchkins in the east and the yellow land of the Winkies in the west. These directions are confirmed by the text of all of Baum's Oz books, especially the first, in which The Wicked Witch of the East rules over the Munchkins, and The Wicked Witch of the West rules over the Winkies.
Like traditional western maps, the Fairylogue and Radio-Play map showed the west on the left, and the east on the right. However, the first map of Oz to appear in an Oz book had those directions reversed, and the compass rose adjusted accordingly.[21] It is believed that this is a result of Baum copying the map from the wrong side of the glass slide, effectively getting a mirror image of his intended map. When he realized he was copying the slide backward, he reversed the compass rose to make the directions correct. However, an editor at Reilly and Lee reversed the compass rose, thinking he was fixing an error and resulting in further confusion.[22] Most notably, this confused Ruth Plumly Thompson, who frequently reversed directions in her own Oz books as a result.
Another speculation stems from the original conception of Oz, which at first appeared to be situated in an American desert. If Baum thought of the country of the Munchkins as the nearest region to him, it would have been in the east while he lived in Chicago, but when he moved to California, it would have be in the west.[23]
Modern maps of Oz are almost universally drawn with the Winkies in the west and the Munchkins in the east, although west and east often appear reversed. Many Oz fans believe this is the correct orientation, perhaps as a result of Glinda's spell, which has the effect of confusing most standard compasses; perhaps resembling its similarity to the world Alice found through the looking glass in which everything was a mirror image; or perhaps just reflecting the alien nature of Oz. In Robert A. Heinlein's book The Number of the Beast he explains that Oz is on a retrograde planet, meaning that it spins in the opposite direction of Earth so that the sun seems to rise on one's left as one faces north. March Laumer's The Magic Mirror of Oz attribues the changes to a character named Till Orangespiegel attempting to turn the Land of Oz orange.

Oz, like all of Baum's fantasy countries, was presented as existing as part of the real world, albeit protected from civilization by natural barriers.[24] Indeed, in the first books, nothing indicated that it was not hidden in the deserts of the United States.[6] It gradually acquired neighboring magical countries, often from works of Baum's that had been independent, as Ix from Queen Zixi of Ix, and Mo from The Magical Monarch of Mo.[25] The first of these is Ev, introduced in Ozma of Oz.[18]
In Tik-Tok of Oz, Baum included maps in the endpapers which definitively situated Oz in a continent with its neighboring countries.[26] Oz is the largest country on the continent unofficially known as Nonestica (this name was proposed by Robert R. Pattrick in The Unexplored Territory in Oz for the whole of the countries surrounding Oz. Pattrick proposed "Ozeria" for the whole continent, but that name is generally unused in fan discussions), which also includes the countries of Ev, Ix, and Mo, which has also been known as Phunniland, among others. Nonestica is, according to the map, in the Nonestic Ocean. A fair amount of evidence in the books point to this continent as being envisioned as somewhere in the southern Pacific Ocean.[27] At the opening of Ozma of Oz, Dorothy Gale is sailing to Australia with her Uncle Henry when she is washed overboard (in a chicken coop, with Billina the yellow hen), and lands on the shore of Ev—a rare instance in which an outsider reaches the Oz landmass through non-magical (or apparently non-magical) means. Palm trees grow outside the Royal Palace in the Emerald City, and horses are not native to Oz, both points of consistency with a South-Pacific location; illustrations and descriptions of round-shaped and domed Ozian houses suggest a non-Western architecture. Conversely, Oz has technological, architectural, and urban elements typical of Europe and North America around the turn of the twentieth century; but this may involve cultural input from unusual external sources (see History below). Ruth Plumly Thompson asserts in her first Oz book, The Royal Book of Oz, that the language of Oz is English, which also suggests European or American influence.
An argument against the South Pacific is that the seasons in Oz are shown as the same seasons in the United States at the same time. In addition, in The Wishing Horse of Oz, Pigasus follows the North Star when he flies to Thunder Mountain, which could only be done in the Northern Hemisphere.

Baum's creation of the Emerald City may have been inspired by the White City of the World Columbian Exposition, which he visited frequently. Its quick building, in less than a year, may have been an element in the quick construction of the Emerald City in the first book.[28]
Schematically, Oz is much like the United States, with the Emerald City taking the place of Chicago: to the East, mixed forest and farmland; to the West, treeless plains and fields of wheat; to the South, warmth and lush growth, and red earth.[28]
It has also been speculated since The Wizard of Oz was first written that Oz may have been based on China.[29] Either way, the oriental influence on Oz has been noted by more than one scholar. [30]
Ruth Plumly Thompson took a different direction with her Oz books, introducing European elements such as the title character of The Yellow Knight of Oz, a knight straight out of Arthurian Legend.
OZ was created by Baum looking at a filing cabinet (A-N O-Z)


The world of the Oz books is ruled (and presumably created) by the immortals. These include fairies, nomes, mermaids, nymphs, and several races created by Baum himself, including ryls, knooks, gigans, and rampsies.
All of the immortals are ruled over three immortal "masters", described in Baum's The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus:

The word "fairy" is used in several ways throughout the Oz books. "Fairy people" is often used to describe the people of Oz, who seem to be nothing more than human inhabitants of a fairy country. A number of supernatural creatures are also called fairies, from female spirits of nature who live in mist and on the rainbow, to the nomes, who are seemingly all male, yet also described as earth fairies.
The most powerful kind of fairy is never known by any other name in the books, although Baum sometimes differentiated them by spelling Fairy with a capital F. The Fairies seem to be the most powerful race, with seemingly limitless power. They travel in bands ruled over by Fairy Queens, and spend their time primarily in helping mortals and dancing.
Lurline is a Fairy Queen, and she and her band were the ones who made Oz a fairyland. According to Baum's later books, Ozma is a member of Lurline's band. There are no other Fairies of the highest sort in the Oz books, although The Life and Adventures of Santa Claus and Queen Zixi of Ix, which take place in lands neighboring Oz, both mention other Fairy Queens and their bands.

Baum introduced the Nomes in Ozma of Oz, and they served as antagonists throughout the rest of the series. Baum always spelled their name without the traditional silent G, perhaps to Americanize the name, or to make it easier for his child audience to pronounce. Thompson later "corrected" Baum's spelling in her first book, and retained it throughout all the Oz books she wrote.
The Nomes are subterranean people who spend their time mining precious stones from the earth. They consider all of the mineral wealth of the world to be their own rightful property, which often leads to conflicts with other races; as, for instance, when the Shaggy Man's brother disappears in a mine, it is because the Nomes have captured him.[31] They have a massive army, but not much innate magical ability. Although they play a major role in the Oz series, throughout a major part of the series, there are no Nomes actually living in Oz.

The other immortal races of the world of the Oz books play less significant roles, largely appearing in the "borderlands" books by Baum that occur outside of Oz.
The mermaids care for all life in the ocean, and the nymphs serve a similar function under the Fairies in the forests. The nymphs are helped by the ryls, who color the flowers and care for all plants; and the knooks, who are crooked creatures who govern the beasts.
The massive gigans also served the Fairies until Fairy Queen Lulea, becoming annoyed with their large forms, transformed them into the tiny rampsies, smallest of all immortals. Whatever function they served is unknown, for they're only mentioned in Baum's short story Nelebel's Fairyland, in which the gigans reshape the land in their boredom.

Although Baum did not often use the word "mortal," Thompson seemed far more fond of it as a way of describing the people who had come to Oz from the great outside world. Since Oz was a land much like any other prior to Lurline's enchantment, it seems that the only mortals in Oz are those who were not in Oz at the time it was enchanted, and were not born in Oz thereafter.
The Wizard was the first mortal in Oz described in Baum's books, followed by Dorothy and all the characters she met in her travels. Apart from the Wizard, the only mortals who originally found their way to Oz without Dorothy in Baum's books were Trot, Cap'n Bill, and Betsy Bobbin.

At the time of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, the lands in the North, South, East and West of Oz are each ruled by a witch; the Witches of the North and South are Good, while the Witches of the East and West are Wicked. Glinda, the Good Witch of the South, is later revealed to be the most powerful of the four. After Dorothy's house crushes the Wicked Witch of the East, thereby liberating the Munckins from bondage, the Good Witch of the North tells Dorothy that she (the Witch of the North) is not as powerful as the Wicked Witch of the East had been, or she would have freed the Munchkins herself.
During the first scene in Oz in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, the Good Witch of the North (Locasta or Tattypoo) explains to Dorothy that Oz still has witches and wizards, not being civilized, and goes on to explain that witches and wizards can be both good and evil, unlike the evil witches that Dorothy had been told of.[32] That book contained only the four witches (besides the h
