List of characters in Heroes
This is a list of fictional characters in the television series Heroes, the Heroes graphic novels, and the Heroes webisodes.

In its inaugural season, Heroes featured an ensemble cast of twelve main characters. During the first season, the NBC Heroes cast page listed ten characters among the cast; Leonard Roberts arrived later, and Jack Coleman was promoted to series regular as of the eleventh episode.
For the second season of the show, Santiago Cabrera, Tawny Cypress, and Leonard Roberts left the main cast. Zachary Quinto and James Kyson Lee, who were recurring characters in the first season, were added to the main cast for the second season, and were joined by new cast members David Anders, Kristen Bell, Dania Ramírez, and Dana Davis. Anders was originally to be a recurring character, but was promoted to a series regular prior to the start of the season. He is credited as a guest star for the first four episodes of season two.
For the third season, Cristine Rose, recurring in the first two seasons, was promoted to series regular. Kristen Bell, David Anders, and Noah Gray-Cabey were no longer regulars and became guest cast. Additionally, Dana Davis was no longer part of the main cast, as scenes involving her in the third season were cut.
Unlike most series, each main cast member is only credited for the episode he/she appears in.



Charlene "Charlie" Andrews, portrayed by Jayma Mays, is a waitress at the Burnt Toast Diner in Midland, Texas, where Hiro Nakamura and Ando Masahashi stop to eat on their road trip to New York. After she reveals to Hiro that she had recently developed the ability to quickly memorize and recall any information with great accuracy in a seemingly unlimited volume, Sylar murders her in the diner's storeroom, removing her brain in the same manner as his other victims.[4] Hiro tries to prevent her murder by going back in time one day to warn her, but he accidentally goes back six months, to April 24 (Charlie's birthday). He convinces Charlie that both he and she have special powers by stopping time to make one thousand origami cranes. After taking a job at the diner and dating Charlie, Hiro buys two tickets to take her to Tokyo. Charlie ponders her feelings and tells Hiro that while she does not usually let people get close to her due to a blood clot and aneurism in her brain that is killing her, he makes her feel happy and she loves him. However, when Hiro and Charlie are about to kiss, he inadvertently teleports back to present day Japan and is unable to return.[5]

Charles Deveaux, portrayed by Richard Roundtree, is the wealthy father of Simone Deveaux, and one of the founding members of the Company. He owns the Deveaux Society, which opened with the goal to "fund causes that bettered the world", and the Deveaux Building, the rooftop of which is a frequently-visited location in the series.[6] At the beginning of the series, he is under Peter's care due to his failing health, and he has recently lapsed into a coma. Simone believes that Peter is "like a son" to him, and Charles believes that Peter's love and compassion can change the world, as opposed to his former partners' methods.[6] In "Nothing to Hide", Charles and Peter telepathically share a dream in which they fly. After he awakens, he tells Simone about the dream and dies soon after.


Meredith Gordon, portrayed by Jessalyn Gilsig, is the biological mother of Claire Bennet and the older sister of Flint Gordon. She does her best to watch over him, leading their abusive father to tell Flint, "God gave you an older sister instead of a brain." Like her younger brother, Meredith has pyrokinetic abilities, which both enable her to create fire from her body and grant her immunity to the effects of it. The two were separated after she accidentally burned down her father's house with their father inside it, though after years of effort Meredith tracked down and reunited with him. She eventually began a relationship with Nathan Petrelli, and the two conceived a baby, Claire. Meredith was later attacked by Company Agents Noah Bennet and Claude Rains, and her powers created a large explosion that consumed the building. The Company was led to believe that Meredith perished, while Meredith herself believed Claire had died. Years later, Meredith was captured by Agent Eric Thompson, Sr., while robbing a convenience store with Flint. Rather than be a prisoner for the rest of her life, she agreed to train to become an agent. However, after she learned that Flint was also captured and was to become an agent, she felt that the Company was just using the two of them, and broke Flint out. The siblings were separated after Thompson tracked them down, and she was recaptured. However, Thompson lets her go after learning that Claire was her daughter.
Claire manages to track her down after many years, though the two only meet briefly before separating. Meredith blackmails Claire's biological father, Nathan Petrelli, for $100,000 before leaving, and hides his identity from Claire. She later returns at the request of Noah to help protect Claire from the escaped Level Five villains. She helps Claire to admit that, contrary to her claims that she wants to be trained so that she can help people, she actually wants to learn how to fight so that she can get revenge on Sylar. Meredith later confronts Eric Doyle, with whom she has past connections, believing Claire may have gone there. However, she is rescued by Claire and Sandra Bennet, and later accepts Noah's request to rejoin the Company as his partner. When Sylar later takes over Primatech and holds Meredith, Claire, Noah, and Angela hostage, he injects Meredith with high adrenaline, eliminating her control over her pyrokinetic abilities. She and Noah are then placed in a Level 5 cell, where her lack of control threatens to burn Noah alive. Claire manages to break them free and tries to save Meredith, but Noah pulls her away. They make their escape as Meredith loses total control, destroying the Primatech facility.


Paulette Hawkins, portrayed by Tina Lifford, is the mother of D.L. Hawkins, and Micah's grandmother. Her relationship to Niki is tense, questioning her ability to raise Micah. In "One Giant Leap", she defends D.L. in front of Niki. Paulette is convinced that D.L. was framed for killing his crew. She is not seen again until "The Kill Squad, Part 3" where it is revealed that she has the power to enhance other people´s abilities and had become a thorn in the Company's side and she was locked in one of the five levels. She is brought out by the Kill Squad to augment the powers of Brenden Lewis so a crater created by a Guyanan local could be covered in forestry. She performs her duty under the impression that she will be taken to her grandson, Mic
