Stirling engine
A Stirling engine is a device that converts heat energy into mechanical power by alternately compressing and expanding a fixed quantity of air or other gas (the working fluid) at different temperatures.[1]
Originally conceived in 1816 as a rival to the steam engine as an industrial prime mover, practical use of the Stirling engine was largely confined to low-power domestic applications for over a century.[2] In recent years, the advantages of Stirling engines have become increasingly significant, given the rise in liquid fuel prices and concerns such as peak oil and climate change. Stirling engines address these issues by being very compatible with all renewable energy and fuel sources. The Stirling engine is noted for its high efficiency, quiet operation and the ease with which it can utilise what would otherwise be wasted heat and is currently exciting interest as the core component of Micro combined heat and power (CHP) units, widespread adoption of which could have a significant effect upon worldwide energy utilisation.[3][4]

Though it had been suggested as early as 1884 by Fleeming Jenkin that all closed cycle air engines should be generically called Stirling engines after Robert Stirling, the inventor of the first practical example, the idea found little favour and the various types on the market continued to be known by the name of their individual designer or manufacturer, e.g. Rider's, Robinson's or Heinrici's (hot) air engine. Then, in the 1940s, the Philips company was searching for a suitable name for its own version of the 'air engine', which by that time had already been tested with other gases, eventually settling on 'Stirling engine' in April 1945.[5] However, nearly thirty years later Graham Walker was still bemoaning the fact that such terms as 'hot air engine' continued to be used interchangeably with 'Stirling engine' which itself was applied widely and indiscriminately.[6] The situation has now improved somewhat, at least in academic literature, and it is now generally accepted that 'Stirling engine' should refer exclusively to a closed-cycle regenerative heat engine with a permanently gaseous working fluid, where closed-cycle is defined as a thermodynamic system in which the working fluid is permanently contained within the system and regenerative describes the use of a specific type of internal heat exchanger and thermal store, known as "the regenerator".
It follows from the closed cycle operation that the Stirling engine is an external combustion engine that isolates its working fluid from the energy input supplied by an external heat source.There are many possible implementations of the Stirling engine most of which fall into the category of reciprocating piston engine.

The engine is designed so that the working gas is generally compressed in the colder portion of the engine and expanded in the hotter portion resulting in a net conversion of heat into work.[7][8] An internal Regenerative heat exchanger increases the Stirling engine's thermal efficiency compared to simpler hot air engines lacking this feature.


In a Stirling engine, the regenerator is an internal heat exchanger and temporary heat store placed between the hot and cold spaces such that the working fluid passes through it first in one direction then the other. Its function is to retain within the system that heat which would otherwise be exchanged with the environment at temperatures intermediate to the maximum and minimum cycle temperatures,[9] thus enabling the thermal efficiency of the cycle to approach the limiting Carnot efficiency defined by those maxima and minima.
The primary effect of regeneration in a Stirling engine is to greatly increase the thermal efficiency by 'recycling' internally heat which would otherwise pass through the engine irreversibly. As a secondary effect, increased thermal efficiency promises a higher power output from a given set of hot and cold end heat exchangers (since it is these which usually limit the engine's heat throughput), though, in practice this additional power may not be fully realized as the additional "dead space" (unswept volume) and pumping loss inherent in practical regenerators tends to have the opposite effect.
The regenerator works like a thermal capacitor. The ideal regenerator has very high thermal capacity, very low thermal conductivity, almost no volume, and introduces no friction to the working fluid. As the regenerator approaches these ideal limits, Stirling engine efficiency increases.[10]
The design challenge for a Stirling engine regenerator is to provide sufficient heat transfer capacity without introducing too much additional internal volume ('dead space') or flow resistance, both of which tend to reduce power and efficiency. These inherent design conflicts are one of many factors which limit the efficiency of practical Stirling engines. A typical design is a stack of fine metal wire meshes, with low porosity to reduce dead space, and with the wire axes perpendicular to the gas flow to reduce conduction in that direction and to maximize convective heat transfer.[11]
The regenerator is the key component invented by Robert Stirling and its presence distinguishes a true Stirling engine from any other closed cycle hot air engine. However, many engines with no apparent regenerator may still be correctly described as Stirling engines as in the simple beta and gamma configurations with a 'loose fitting' displacer, the surfaces of the displacer and its cylinder will cyclically exchange heat with the working fluid providing a significant regenerative effect particularly in small, low-pressure engines. The same is true of the passage connecting the hot and cold cylinders of an alpha configuration engine.

As a consequence of closed cycle operation the heat that drives a Stirling engine must be transmitted to and from the working fluid by heat exchangers. In small, low power engines these may simply consist of the walls of the hot and cold spaces but where larger powers are required a greater surface area is needed to facilitate the transfer of sufficient heat. Typical implementations are internal and external fins or multiple small bore tubes. As with the regenerator, designing Stirling engine heat exchangers is a balance between high heat transfer with low viscous pumping losses and low dead space.

The heat source may be combustion of a fuel and, since the combustion products do not mix with the working fluid (i.e. external combustion) and come into contact with the internal moving parts of the engine, a Stirling engine can run on fuels that would damage other (i.e. internal combustion) engine’s internals, such as landfill gas or siloxane. Some other suitable heat sources are concentrated solar energy, geothermal energy, nuclear energy, waste heat, or even biological. If the heat source is solar power, regular solar mirrors and solar dishes may be used. Also, fresnel lenses have been advocated to be used (eg for planetary surface exploration).[12] Solar powered Stirling engines are becoming increasingly popular, as they are a very environmentally sound option for producing power. Also, some designs are economically attractive in development projects.[13]
The cold sink is typically provided by a flow of air or water at ambient temperatures. Alternatively, heat may be supplied at ambient and the cold sink maintained at a lower temperature by such means as cryogenic fluid (see Liquid nitrogen economy) or ice water.

There are two major types of Stirling engines that are distinguished by the way that they move the air between the hot and cold sides of the cylinder:

An alpha Stirling contains two power pistons in separate cylinders, one hot and one cold. The hot cylinder is situated inside the high temperature heat exchanger and the cold cylinder is situated inside the low temperature heat exchanger. This type of engine has a high power-to-volume ratio but has technical problems due to the usually high temperature of the hot piston and the durability of its seals.[14] In practice, this piston usually carries a large insulating head to move the seals away from the hot zone at the expense of some additional dead space.

The following diagrams do not show internal heat exchangers in the compression and expansion spaces, which are needed to produce power. A regenerator would be placed in the pipe connecting the two cylinders. The crankshaft has also been omitted.

A beta Stirling has a single power piston arranged within the same cylinder on the same shaft as a displacer piston. The displacer piston is a loose fit and does not extract any power from the expanding gas but only serves to shuttle the working gas from the hot heat exchanger to the cold heat exchanger. When the working gas is pushed to the hot end of the cylinder it expands and pushes the power piston. When it is pushed to the cold end of the cylinder it contracts and the momentum of the machine, usually enhanced by a flywheel, pushes the power piston the other way to compress the gas. Unlike the alpha type, the beta type avoids the technical problems of hot moving seals.[15]

Again, the following diagrams do not show internal heat exchangers or a regenerator, which would be placed in the gas path around the displacer.

A gamma Stirling is simply a beta Stirling in which the power piston is mounted in a separate cylinder alongside the displacer piston cylinder, but is still connected to the same flywheel. The gas in the two cylinders can flow freely between them and remains a single body. This configuration produces a lower compression ratio but is mechanically simpler and often used in multi-cylinder Stirling engines.

Other Stirling configurations continue to interest engineers and inventors. Tom Peat conceived of a configuration that he likes to call a "Delta" type, although currently this designation is not widely recognized, having a displacer and two power pistons, one hot and one cold.[16]
There is also the rotary Stirling engine which seeks to convert power from the Stirling cycle directly into torque, similar to the rotary combustion engine. No practical engine has yet been built but a number of concepts, models and patents have been produced, such as the Quasiturbine engine.[17]
Another alternative is the Fluidyne engine (Fluidyne heat pump), which use hydraulic pistons to implement the Stirling cycle. The work produced by a Fluidyne engine goes into pumping the liquid. In its simplest form, the engine contains a working gas, a liquid and two non-return valves.

"Free piston" Stirling engines, including those with liquid pistons and those with diaphragms as pistons. In a "free piston" device, energy may be added or removed by an electrical linear alternator, 
