Duloxetine
EU EMEA:link, US FDA:link
C(US)
Duloxetine (brand names Cymbalta, Yentreve) is a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI) effective for the treatment of major depressive disorder (MDD), generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), pain related to diabetic neuropathy, fibromyalgia and stress urinary incontinence (SUI). Duloxetine has been approved in many countries for the above indications, with the exception of stress urinary incontinence in the US. It is manufactured and marketed by Eli Lilly.
Large number of side effects occurring during duloxetine treatment and lack of clear advantage over existing medications prompted critical reviews concluding that duloxetine "should not be used" for stress urinary incontinence[1] and "currently has no place in the treatment of depression or diabetic neuropathy" as well.[2][3]

Duloxetine was created by Lilly researchers. David Robertson, David Wong, a co-discoverer of fluoxetine , and Joseph Krushinski are listed as inventors on the patent application filed in 1986 and granted in 1990.[4] The first publication on the discovery of the racemic form of duloxetine known as LY227942, was made in 1988.[5] The (+)-enantiomer of LY227942, assigned LY248686, was chosen for further studies, because it inhibited serotonin reuptake in rat synaptosomes two times more potently than (-)-enantiomer. This molecule was subsequently named duloxetine.[6]
Initial trials conducted in patients using regimens of 20 mg/day or less did not convincingly demonstrate its efficacy [7] and the dose was increased to as high as 120 mg in subsequent clinical trials.[8]
In 2001 Lilly filed a New Drug Application (NDA) for duloxetine with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). However, in 2003 the FDA "recommended this application as not approvable from the manufacturing and control standpoint" because of "significant cGMP violations at the finished product manufacturing facility" of Eli Lilly in Indianapolis. Additionally, "potential liver toxicity" and QTc interval prolongation appeared as a concern. The FDA experts concluded that "Duloxetine can cause hepatotoxicity in the form of transaminase elevations. It may also be a factor in causing more severe liver injury, but there are no cases in the NDA database that clearly demonstrate this. Use of duloxetine in the presence of ethanol may potentiate the deleterious effect of ethanol on the liver." The FDA also recommended "routine blood pressure monitoring" at the new highest recommended dose of 120 mg, "where 24% patients had one or more [blood pressure] readings of 140/90 vs. 9% of placebo patients."[9]
After the manufacturing issues were resolved, the liver toxicity warning included in the prescribing information, and the follow-up studies showed that duloxetine does not cause QTc interval prolongation, duloxetine was approved by the FDA for depression and diabetic neuropathy in 2004.[10] In 2007 Health Canada approved duloxetine for the treatment of depression and diabetic peripheral neuropathic pain.[11]
Duloxetine was approved for use of stress urinary incontinence (SUI) in the EU in 2004. In 2005, Lilly withdrew the duloxetine application for stress urinary incontinence (SUI) in the U.S., stating that discussions with the FDA indicated "the agency is not prepared at this time to grant approval ... based on the data package submitted." A year later Lilly abandoned the pursuit of this indication in the U.S. market.[12]

The main uses of duloxetine are in major depressive disorder, general anxiety disorder, stress urinary incontinence, painful peripheral neuropathy and fibromyalgia. In addition, it is being studied for various other indications.

Duloxetine has demostrated efficacy for the treatment of major depressive disorder. In three out of six well-designed properly controlled pre-marketing trials duloxetine performed better than placebo; the three other trials were inconclusive.[13] Recently, duloxetine was shown to be effective in elderly with recurrent major depressive disorder where it improved cognition, depression, and some pain measures. [14] A meta-analysis of these trials indicated that the effect size of duloxetine as compared with placebo was weak-to-moderate, and similar to other 11 antidepressants studied.[15] The rationale behind the development of duloxetine was that inhibition of the reuptake of both serotonin and norepinephrine would make it work better than selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which inhibit only the reuptake of serotonin. However, in a comparative meta-analysis of clinical trials duloxetine appeared to be insignificantly less effective than SSRIs.[16] A head-to-head comparison of duloxetine with an SSRI escitalopram (Lexapro) found duloxetine to be both less tolerable and less effective.[17] Another analysis of the comparative efficacy of modern antidepressants found duloxetine to be significantly, by 30-40%, less efficacious than mirtazapine (Remeron), escitalopram, venlafaxine (Effexor) and sertraline (Zoloft). Duloxetine was similar to fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine (Luvox) and paroxetine (Paxil). The tolerability of duloxetine was significantly worse than the tolerability of escitalopram and sertraline.[18]
A review in Prescrire International summarizing the existing evidence noted that duloxetine has limited efficacy in depression, and has not yet have been shown to be better than any other antidepressant. Prescrire observed that, taking into account the risk of hepatic disorders and drug interactions, there is no reason to chose duloxetine when so many other options are available.[2] Similar analysis was presented by Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin, which is a part of the respected BMJ Group.[19]

Duloxetine was first reported to improve outcomes in stress urinary incontinence (SUI) in 1998.[20] Systematic reviews with meta-analysis, conducted in 2005 by Cochrane Collaboration [21] and in 2008 by University of Minnesota,[22] concluded that duloxetine failed to cure SUI better than placebo. According to the Cochrane review, some studies showed that episodes of incontinence were reduced by about 50%. This was associated with an improvement in quality of life measurements.[21] According to the University of Minnesota review, duloxetine performed worse than oxybutynin (Ditropan) or tolterodine (Detrol) that cured 18% of the cases, or than pelvic floor muscle training + bladder training, which cured 13% of the cases. In terms of "improvement", that is incomplete cure, duloxetine showed improvement in 11% of patients while pelvic floor muscle training + bladder training showed improvement in 36% of the cases.[22] Significant side effects were common with duloxetine; they were reported as acceptable and about a fifth had to discontinue the medication because of poor tolerance.[21]
In addition, the full report prepared by Minnesota Evidence-based Practice Center for the US government, on which the University of Minnesota review is based, notes that weight reduction would result in improved SUI in 990 adults per 1,000 treated. [23] In the light of the cited data, the report does not mention duloxetine in its policy recommendations. The only recommended interventions are early behavioral changes in weight, physical activity, and pelvic floor muscle training.[23]
The only clinical trial, which directly compared duloxetine with the gold standard of the SUI treatment pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) was conducted by Eli Lilly and gave mixed results. The incontinence episode frequency in duloxetine group decreased by 57% vs. 35% in the PFTM group. However, the differences in the pad use and quality of life were not statistically significant. To the contrary, 65% patients doing PFTM reported feeling better vs 54% of the patients on duloxetine. 31% of the patients on duloxetine discontinued the trial due to the side effects during the first 12 weeks.[24] In the continuation of this trial more than 91% of the patients on duloxetine experienced side effects.[25]
Summing up the existing evidence, a review in Prescrire International recommends pelvic floor exercises, which are "risk-free and effective in two-thirds to three-quarters of cases", as the first line treatment of SUI. Duloxetine use reduced the frequency of stress incontinence by one episode a day as compared with placebo. "The tangible effect of duloxetine on the quality of life is doubtful, with a maximum gain of five points on a 100-point scale." The review notes that, at best, duloxetine efficacy is "modest and transient, while its adverse effects are numerous and potentially severe."[1]

At 20 mg per day Cymbalta showed no clinical improvement over placebo. At 60 mg per day Cymbalta showed modest improvement for diabetic pain over baseline, with 51% of patients treated with Cymbalta reporting at least a 30% sustained reduction in pain. In comparison, 31% of patients treated with placebo reported this magnitude of sustained pain reduction. In one study Duloxetine treatment was considered to be safe and well tolerated with less than 20 percent discontinuation due to adverse events, another trial had a low dropout rate of 12.1 percent.[26][27] Duloxetine is not effective for the numbness or tingling, nor is it effective for the other complications of diabetes. It does not treat the underlying nerve damage, but can help reduce the pain.[28]

On May 11 2006, Eli Lilly and Company announced the recent submission of a supplemental New Drug Application (sNDA) to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for Cymbalta for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).
Eli Lilly said the FDA has approved Cymbalta for the treatment of GAD in February 2007.[29] Eli Lilly said that in clinical trials patients treated with Cymbalta for GAD experienced a 46% improvement in anxiety symptoms, compared to 32% for those who took placebo, as measured by the Hamilton Anxiety Scale.

On October 19, 2006, Eli Lilly issued a press release saying they had done trials which found that Cymbalta, at 60 mg once or twice daily, significantly reduced pain in more than half of women treated for fibromyalgia (FM), with and without major depression, according to 12-week data presented at the annual meeting of the American College of Rheumatology. Eli Lilly is in Phase III of its FM trials and is expected to submit a sNDA to the FDA for approval of Cymbalta for FM within the next 12 months.
Critics argue that randomized controlled trials of FM are difficult due to factors such as a lack of understanding of the pathophysiology and a heterogeneous FM patient population. Although there is a lack of understanding of what causes FM, it is estimated that approximately 5-7% of the U.S. population has FM,[30] representing a large patient clientele. Eli Lilly hopes Cymbalta will be the first FDA approved medication for FM and had been promoting Cymbalta for FM since 2004.[31]
In the study testing the efficacy of Cymbalta for FM, participants completed several questionnaires to measure the amount of pain and discomfort the disease caused them at the beginning of the study, and then at the end of each of the first two weeks and every second week for the remaining 12 weeks of the study. Researchers also tested the participants for depression.[31]
Women who took Cymbalta had significantly less pain and discomfort than those who took the placebo. For men, who made up only 11% of the study, there was no effect from taking the medication compared with a placebo. Reportedly, depression played no part in whether or not the drug worked to control pain. The change in the level of women's pain was particularly pronounced after a month of taking the drug, then leveled off a bit before dropping again near the end of the study.[31]
However, in one of the primary measures of pain there was no significant difference between the two groups at the end of the 12-week trial. Also, because the trial lasted only 12 weeks, it is impossible to tell how well the drug would control treatment for a longer period of time.[31]
The Food and Drug Administration regulators approved the drug for the treatment of fibromyalgia in June 2008. [32]

As of January 11 2007, Eli Lilly is currently enrolling patients for double blind Phase II and Phase III trials of Cymbalta for the use of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) in conjunction with the University of Cincinnati.[33] CFS is characterized by severe disabling fatigue of at least six months' duration which cannot be fully explained by an identifiable medical condition. Eli Lilly has not publicly stated their hypothesis for use of Cymbalta for CFS.[citation needed]

The following contraindications are listed by the manufacturer:[citation needed]

Nausea, somnolence, insomnia, and dizziness are the main side effects, reported by about 10% to 20% of patients.[34]
In a trial for mild major depressive disorder (MDD), the most commonly reported treatment-emergent adverse events among duloxetine-treated patients were nausea (34.7%), dry mouth (22.7%), headache (20.0%) and dizziness (18.7%), and except for headache, these were reported significantly more often than in the placebo group:[35]
Other side-effects include:
