Person-to-person lending
Person-to-person lending (also known as peer-to-peer lending and social lending) is, in its broadest sense, the name given to a certain breed of financial transaction (primarily lending & borrowing, though other more complicated transactions can be facilitated) which occurs directly between individuals ("peers") without the intermediation/participation of a traditional financial institution. See also disintermediation. An enabling technology for person-to-person lending has been the Internet, where person-to-person lending appears in two primary variations: an "online marketplace" model and a "family and friend" model.

The marketplace model of Person to Person Lending on the internet enables individual lenders to locate individual borrowers and vice-versa. This model connects borrowers with lenders through an auction-like process in which the lender willing to provide the lowest interest rate "wins" the borrower's loan. The marketplace process may include other intermediaries who package and resell the loans, but the loans are ultimately sold to individuals or pools of individuals.
The "family and friend" model forgoes the auction-like process entirely and concentrates on borrowers and lenders who already know one another, as with two (or more) friends or business colleagues formalizing a personal loan. Whereas the primary benefit of the marketplace model is the "match making" aspect, the family and friend model emphasizes online collaboration, loan formalization and servicing.
Traditionally, lending institutions have benefited from scale and diversification. By pooling the available money supply and lending it out again, the impact of any one default is made trivial in light of the timely payment of the vast majority of the notes outstanding. The downside to the traditional model is that it has introduced greater transaction overhead and removed community loyalty from the equation.
Person-to-Person Lending models attempt to reintroduce the social components that are lost in traditional centralized banking models, while maintaining a mixed quantitative/qualitative balance of diversification - as opposed to the purely quantitative diversification available through institutional lending. They also attempt to take advantage of the lack of overhead implicit in being primarily online ventures, thereby reducing the infrastructure costs (such as physical branches) inherent in traditional bank lending models. These cumulative savings may serve to narrow the bid/ask spread. For example, a bank may offer its deposit account customers a meager 1% return, yet, at the same time, lend out those same customer funds (on deposit) to the bank's other customers who need to borrow - and for a much higher rate of interest - while pocketing the difference. Person to Person Lending attempts to correct this inefficiency and create a "virtuous cycle" which would allow those who have funds to lend to garner a better return, while, at the same time, providing a more favorable interest rate to those who need to borrow, by removing the bank from the equation.
Person to Person Lending allows individual participants to directly control the allocation of their own capital, as opposed to the traditional bank lending models which pool all funds together and completely remove the individuals who actually own the money from the decision-making process regarding who may borrow that money, for how long they may borrow it, and under what rates and terms.
Community Lending is a form of Person to Person Lending which involves intra-group many-to-one or one-to-many credit structures. It has as its theoretical premise the notion that pre-existing interpersonal relationships or other types of social connections between the transacting parties will foster increased fiscal responsibility and thereby improve repayment performance. Similar types of mutualized credit systems are already quite often successfully employed by microfinance institutions in developing nations. For example, a microfinance institution may make a loan to an individual who is a member of small group in a certain locale, but may structure its lending agreement to hold the borrower's "social group" either directly accountable for the repayment of the loan (akin to "cosigning") or indirectly accountable (whereby the entire social group may face future consequences, such as reduced access to credit or higher future rates, if one of its members fails to repay an obligation). The principle behind this form of transaction being that it is better to diversify risk over a smaller pool of "related" individuals, rather than just a single borrower, so that the borrower's immediate community- or social-group could be positively incented to affect repayment, either through mutual ("community") support of the borrower or, as occurs in some instances, through forms of social pressure. Community lending, however, occurs (rigorously) "only" when this form of lending and borrowing is transacted on a purely intra-group basis between members of a specific community (without the involvement of a corporate institution on one side of the transaction - though the argument can be made that this model, in some ways, serves to "incorporate" pre-existing social groups).
In 2005, there were $118 million of outstanding peer-to-peer loans. In 2006, there were $269 million, and, in 2007, a total of $647 million. The projected amount for 2010 is $5.8 billion.[1]

Traditionally there was no concept of banks or financial institutions. There was only person-to-person lending or there were rich money lenders who were lending money to the needy.
With the increase in trade and commerce, society evolved institutions which acted as intermediaries between lenders and borrowers.
Advantages
Disadvantage to this model developed over a period of time :
Intermediaries charged the spread for the following reasons :

With the growth of internet technologies new business models evolved to remove the intermediaries like
A natural extension of these was person-to-person lending or peer-to-peer lending. The first P2P lending company to launch was Zopa in the UK in February 2005. In principle two models have evolved in the P2P lending space: secured P2P and unsecured P2P lending.

In this model, the lender gives money to the borrower against the strength of the collateral given by the borrower. The advantage of this model is that the capital and interest of the lender is secured to the extent of the realizable value of the collateral. The Dis-intermediator provides risk management as per the terms and condition agreed upon by the lender and the borrower.

In this model, the lender gives money to the borrower based on the credit rating of the borrower. The lender runs the risk of the capital and interest in case of failure on the part of the borrower. Two variants have evolved in this space.
Pooled Lending - the lender lends the money to a pool of borrowers with similar credit ratings. In this model the risk of capital and interest for the lender is defaulters in the pool. The risk of capital and interest of the lender is reduced considerably. See Zopa USA (discontinued) or Pertuity Direct or for examples. This model is very similar to the traditional bank model and does not allow the lenders to select individual borrowers.
Direct Lending - the lender lends money to a borrower based on their credit rating. In this model the risk of capital and interest for the lender is that the borrower could default on the loan. See Kiva, The Open Source Science Project, Prosper, Lending Club, Zopa UK or Loanio for examples.

Peer-to-peer platforms have also developed in the microfinance sector. Some of these platforms enable microfinance institutions to access capital, they might have not got otherwise through conventional sources of credit such as local banks. Peer-to-peer platforms allow the general public to participate in alleviating poverty by lending, guaranteeing or contributing to micro-entrepreneurs.
Lend to micro-entrepreneurs:
Kiva.org launched in 2005 and is the first micro-lending Website that enables an individual to lend money to a micro-entrepreneur in the developing world through a microfinance institution. As of November 2008, over 100 field partners have collaborated with Kiva, dramatically extending its scope and reach.
MYC4 (Denmark) launched in 2007 and new platforms which connect lenders to micro-entrepreneurs are emerging on the web : Rang De (India), dhanaX (India) and veecus.com (France).
Guarantee loans to micro-entrepreneurs:
United Prosperity will enable an individual to guarantee a loan to the micro-entrepreneur they choose to connect and support. The guarantee allows the microfinance institution to raise funds in local currency from local banks and make a loan to micro-entrepreneurs. Since the guarantee is only for a part of the loan amount, the guarantee allows the guarantors to multiply the impact of their money.
Contribute to micro-entrepreneurs:
Wokai (lending to China) allows contributors to contribute towards micro-entrepreneurs they choose to connect and support. Since the contribution is a donation, contributors in the United States may also get a tax-deduction.








