Joyce Hatto
Joyce Hatto (5 September 1928 – 29 or 30 June 2006) was a British pianist and piano teacher. She became famous late in life, when unauthorized copies of commercial recordings made by other pianists were released under her name, earning her high praise from critics. The fraud did not come to light until a few months after her death.

Hatto played at a small number of concerts in London beginning in the 1950s. There were also concerts by "pupils of Joyce Hatto":[1] she taught the piano at Crofton Grange, a girls' boarding school in Hertfordshire.[2]
Her playing drew mixed notices from the critics. A critic for The Times wrote of an October 1953 performance at Chelsea Town Hall that "Joyce Hatto grappled doggedly with too hasty tempi in Mozart's D Minor piano concerto and was impeded from conveying significant feelings towards the work, especially in quick figuration."[3] Trevor Harvey wrote of her Saga recording of Rachmaninoff's Piano Concerto No.2 "one wonders ... whether her technique is really on top of the difficulties of this music ... She shows a musical sense of give and take with the orchestra but it remains a small, rather pallid performance" (The Gramophone, August 1961).
Vernon Handley, who conducted the Guildford Philharmonic on her recording of Sir Arnold Bax's Symphonic Variations, also had reservations: "She was very, very good as a solo player, and a very nice person, but she had a very doubtful sense of rhythm ... [t]he recording of the Bax was a tremendous labour."[4] Still the record received a favourable review: "Joyce Hatto gives a highly commendable account of the demanding piano part," wrote Robert Layton (Gramophone, February 1971).
In 1973 Hatto gave the world premiere of two recently-published Bourrées by Chopin in London's Queen Elizabeth Hall.[5] However by 1976 she had stopped performing in public, with only a few recordings to her credit. It was later claimed that she was already battling cancer at the time.[6] However, the consultant radiologist who saw her every six weeks for the last eight years of her life stated that she was first treated for ovarian cancer in 1992, fourteen years before her death and had had no previous history of the disease.[7]

In Hatto's last years, more than 100 recordings falsely attributed to her appeared. The repertoire represented on the CDs included the complete sonatas of Beethoven, Mozart and Prokofiev, concertos by Rachmaninoff, Tchaikovsky, Brahms and Mendelssohn, and most of Chopin's compositions, along with rarer works such as the complete Godowsky Chopin Studies. The recordings were released, along with piano recordings falsely attributed to the late Sergio Fiorentino, by the English label Concert Artist Recordings, run by Hatto's husband William Barrington-Coupe. Barrington-Coupe had a long history in the record industry [8]. To go along with the release of these 'Hatto' recordings, stories began to be spread by Barrington-Coupe about his wife's contacts in the distant past with many of the greatest musicians of the mid-twentieth century, all by then dead;[3] even the distinguished critic Neville Cardus had been dazzled by her playing, according to a story found in one obituary.[9]
From 2003 onwards, the recordings attributed to Hatto began to receive enthusiastic praise from a small number of participants on various Usenet groups, mailing lists, and web forums[10], sparked by a blind-listening test in December 2002 posted on ThePiano Yahoo! group featuring a recording under Hatto's name of Liszt's Mephisto Waltz. Specialized record review magazines and websites, such as Gramophone, MusicWeb and Classics Today, as well as newspapers such as The Boston Globe, eventually discovered Hatto, reviewed the recordings (with mostly very favourable notices), and published interviews and appreciations of her career; in one case, she was described as "the greatest living pianist that almost no one has ever heard of."[11] Those praising the recordings included Tom Deacon[12], a former record producer for Philips, who produced the Great Pianists series, Bryce Morrison[13], a long-time reviewer for Gramophone, Jed Distler[14], a reviewer for Classics Today, Ateş Orga[15], a music critic who also wrote some of the liner notes for Concert Artist, as well as an obituary, and Ivan Davis[16], a well-known professional pianist [17].
In May 2005, the musicologist Marc-André Roberge reported on the Yahoo! Godowsky group![18] that, in Hatto’s version of the Chopin-Godowsky Studies on the Concert Artist label, a misreading of a chord was identical to one on the Carlo Grante recording (AIR-CD-9092, released 1993). However, this curious coincidence did not prompt Roberge (or others) to investigate further, and verification of the copying from the Grante disc only occurred in 2007 (see below).
In early 2006, doubts about various aspects of Hatto's recording output were expressed, both in the RMCR Usenet Group and, following the publication of a lengthy appreciation of Hatto in the March issue of Gramophone, by readers of that magazine. In particular, some found it hard to believe that a pianist who had not performed in public for decades and was said to be fighting cancer should produce in her old age a vast number of recordings, all apparently of high quality. It also proved difficult to confirm any of the details of the recordings made with orchestra, including even the existence of the conductor credited. The doubters were vigorously countered, most publicly by critic Jeremy Nicholas who, in the July 2006 issue of Gramophone, challenged unnamed sceptics to substantiate their accusations by providing evidence that would "stand up in a court of law". Nicholas's challenge was not taken up, and in December, Radio New Zealand was able, in all innocence, to re-broadcast their hour-long programme of glowing appreciation of the Concert Artist Hatto CDs. This programme included excerpts from a phone interview with Hatto herself, conducted on April 6, 2006, in which she said nothing to dispel the presenter's assumption that she was the sole pianist on all the CDs.
The favourable reviews and publicity generated substantial sales for the Concert Artist CDs: in 2006, one online retailer did £50,000 worth of business with Barrington-Coupe.[19]
Hatto died on June 29 or June 30, 2006[20][21] (sources differ as to the actual date).

In February 2007 it was announced that the CDs ascribed to Hatto had been discovered to contain copies, in some cases digitally manipulated (stretched or shrunk in time, re-equalised and rebalanced), of published commercial recordings made by other artists. While some of these artists were well-known, the majority were less so. When Brian Ventura, a financial analyst from Mount Vernon, New York, put the recording of Liszt's Transcendental Etudes credited to Hatto into his computer, the Gracenote database used by the iTunes software identified the disc not as a recording by Hatto but as one by László Simon. On checking online samples of the Simon recording, Ventura found it to be remarkably similar to the version credited to Hatto. He then contacted Jed Distler, a critic for Classics Today and Gramophone, who had praised many of the recordings ascribed to Hatto.[22]
Says Distler,
An identification of the source of another recording, which had been in preparation for some months,[25] was released the following day by The AHRC Research Centre for the History and Analysis of Recorded Music (CHARM) (based at Royal Holloway, University of London)[26] as a by-product of research on performances of Chopin Mazurkas.[27] Within a week of the initial story being posted on the Gramophone website on 15 February, the sources for some 20 of Hatto's Concert Artist CDs had been identified.
On each of the concerto recordings published in Hatto's final years under her name, the conductor's name was given as "René Köhler", and Barrington-Coupe provided a detailed biography for "Köhler".[28] The information given there has not withstood careful scrutiny.[29] The conductors whose work is represented on the concerto recordings credited to Hatto and Köhler are now known to include Esa-Pekka Salonen, André Previn and Bernard Haitink, while the orchestras, claimed to be the National Philharmonic-Symphony and the Warsaw Philharmonia, are now known to include the Vienna Philharmonic, The Philharmonia, and the Royal Philharmonic.

Barrington-Coupe initially denied any wrongdoing but subsequently admitted the fraud in a letter to Robert von Bahr, the head of the Swedish BIS record label that had originally issued some of the recordings plagiarized by Concert Artists. Bahr shared the contents of the letter with Gramophone magazine, which reported the confession on its website on February 26, 2007. [30] Barrington-Coupe claims that Hatto was unaware of the deception, that he acted out of love and made little money from the enterprise, and that he started out by pasting portions of other pianists' recordings into recordings made by Hatto in order to cover up her "gasps of pain". Some critics, however, have cast doubt on this version of events.[31][32] The discovery of plagiarized tracks on a Concert Artist compact disc released under the name of pianist Sergio Fiorentino raised further questions.[33] Barrington-Coupe has so far refused to help identify the sources of the recordings issued under Hatto's name, claiming that "whatever I do, it won’t be enough".[34]
The British Phonographic Industry (BPI) has begun an investigation. If the allegations are true, it would be "one of the most extraordinary cases of piracy the record industry had ever seen", according to a BPI spokesman.[35]

Here is a list of some of the performances attributed to Hatto whose sources have so far been discovered (sorted by Concert Artist catalogue number). More detailed track by track information can be found at the Joyce Hatto Identifications website
