Arepa
An arepa is a bread made of corn originating from the northern Andes in South America, and which has now spread to other areas in Latin America (e.g. Costa Rica, and the Dominican Republic, where it is now popular). It is similar to the Mesoamerican tortilla.
The word "arepa" may originate from the language of the Caracas natives (north coast of Venezuela) that means "maize."[citation needed]

The arepa is a flat, unleavened patty made of cornmeal which can be grilled, baked, or fried. The characteristics of the arepa vary from region to region: It may vary by color, flavor, size, thickness, garniture, and also the food may be stuffed with.


There are two ways to prepare the dough. The traditional, labor-intensive method requires the maize grains to be soaked, then peeled and ground in a large mortar known as a pil칩n. The pounding removes the pericarp and the seed germ, as only the cotyledons of the maize seed are used to make the dough. The resulting mixture, known as mortared maize, or ma칤z pilado, was normally sold as dry grain to be boiled and ground into dough.
The most popular method today is to buy pre-cooked arepa cornmeal. The flour is mixed with water and salt, and occasionally oil, eggs, and/or milk. After being kneaded and formed into patties, the dough is fried, grilled, or baked. This production of corn is unusual for not using the nixtamalization, or alkali cooking process, to remove the pericarp of the corn kernels. Arepa flour is lower in nutritive value than nixtamal, with its protein value reduced by half.[citation needed]

Pre-made arepa flour is specially prepared for making arepas and other maize dough-based dishes. such as hallacas, bollos, tamales, empanadas, and chicha. The most popular brand names of corn flour are Areparina in Colombia, and Harina PAN in Venezuela. Pre-made arepa flour is usually made from white corn, but there are yellow corn varieties available. Pre-made arepa flour was invented in the 1950s by Dr. Caballero Mejias, a Venezuelan engineer who used the profits from his patent to finance a Technical Schools system. The precooked flour was later mass produced and sold in larger quantities.[citation needed]

In Venezuela, various kitchen appliance companies sell appliances like the Tostyarepa, similar to a waffle iron, which cooks arepas using two hot metallic surfaces clamped with the raw dough inside. In Venezuela, the arepa is traditionally grilled on a budare, which is a flat, originally non-metallic surface which may or may not have a handle. Arepas cooked this way are called tostadas. Nowadays, it is common to follow the grilling process that forms a crust, known as a concha, within twenty to twenty five minutes of cooking at high heat in an oven. Electric arepa makers such as the Tostyarepa reduce cooking time from fifteen to twenty five minutes per side to seven minutes or less.
Electric arepa makers are not popular in Colombia, with most households choosing to prepare them traditionally.

The predecessor of the arepa was a staple of the Timoto-cuicas, an Amerindian group that lived in the northern Andes. Other Amerindian tribes in the region, such as the Arawaks and the Caribs, widely consumed a form of the arepa known as casabe made from cassava (yuca). With the colonization by the Spanish, the food that would become the arepa was diffused into the rest of the region, known then as Nueva Granada(Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Panama).
Both Colombians and Venezuelans view the arepa as a traditional national food. The arepa has a long tradition in both countries, with local recipes that are very delicious and varied.

In Eastern Venezuela, the most common variety of arepa is usually about 3 to 8말nches (200맔m) in diameter and 3/4 inches thick. Larger arepas can be found, made with either white or yellow corn. In the western Andes, arepas are flatter, and are typically quarter of an inch or less in thickness and 3 to 4말nches (100맔m) in diameter. An arepa can be eaten with a filling, similar like a Salvadorean pupusa. However, the arepa is split after cooking, and filled with ingredients such as cheese or deli meats. A filled arepa is called an arepa rellena or a Venezuelan tostada, although the latter term is not commonly used today. An arepa can also be dressed with toppings such as cheese and eaten open-faced.
Venezuelans prepare arepas depending on personal taste or preference and the region in which they are made. Venezuelan varieties include:
Other fillings include guacuco (a shellfish), school shark or caz칩n, ham, quail eggs, and octopus.

In Colombia, the arepa has deep roots in the colonial farms and the cuisine of the indigenous people. Today, arepas are prepared less frequently at home and are usually purchased in stores, either pre-made or in flour form.
Arepas are usually eaten for breakfast or as an afternoon snack. Common toppings include butter, cheese, chocolate, and hogao.
Colombians may eat arepas plain, or consume other varieties.

While less popular than in Venezuela, filled arepas resembling sandwiches are sold throughout Colombia as well.
In the western part of Colombia, especially around Bogot치, Cali and Medell칤n, a traditional breakfast includes an arepa with traditional Colombian hot chocolate.
Companies such as "Don Ma칤z" have started to market new, less traditional varieties of arepas in Colombian grocery stores that are nonetheless growing in popularity. These include cassava-flavored arepas and arepas made of brown rice and sesame seeds.

In Colombia, the Arepuela is similar the traditional arepa. It is made with wheat flour and sometimes anise, and when fried, the layers expand and the arepuela inflates, similar to miniature tortillas or pancakes. This is very common in the interior of Colombia. In the north, bollos are popular for breakfast, which are made with the same dough as an arepa, but boiled rather than fried which gives them a texture similar to Czech bread dumplings.
In Costa Rica, arepas can be made from batter, and may be similar to pancakes. There are at least two sorts of arepas, the "pancake arepa" which is made with baking powder, and the "big flat arepa" which is made without baking powder. These big flat arepas are in size not unlike the big tortillas that you find in Guanacaste (Northern Costa Rica), (i.e. some twelve inches in diameter) and are made of white floor and are sugary. Once perfecly cooked they should ressemble a "giraffe skin", or a "jaguar skin" (i.e. white/yellowish with brown spots).
In Mexico, there is a similar dish that is fried and called gorditas, which is different from the tortilla.
In El Salvador, similar flat cakes are called pupusas. The most important difference is that the flat cake is filled before it is cooked, usually some pork, white cheese or black beans.

