Republic of Macedonia
on the European continent††(white)† ‚Äî† [Legend]
The Republic of Macedonia  /Àåm√¶s…®Ààdo äni…ô/ (help¬∑info), (Macedonian: –†–µ–ø—É–±–ª–∏–∫–∞ –ú–∞–∫–µ–¥–æ–Ω–∏—ò–∞, transliterated: Republika Makedonija  [r…õÀàpublika mak…õÀàd…înija] ), often referred to simply as Macedonia, is a country in the central Balkan peninsula in southeastern Europe. It is one of the successor states of the former Yugoslavia, from which it declared independence in 1991. It was admitted to the United Nations in 1993 under the provisional reference the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,[3][4] commonly abbreviated to FYROM,[5][6] pending resolution of a naming dispute with Greece.[7] Following the UN, most international organizations officially use "former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia", but the majority of individual nations use "Republic of Macedonia" in their bilateral relations.[8]
A landlocked country, it is bordered by Serbia and Kosovo to the north, Bulgaria to the east, Greece to the south and Albania to the west.[9] The capital is Skopje, with 506,926 inhabitants according to a 2004 census, and there are a number of smaller cities, notably Bitola, Kumanovo, Prilep, Tetovo, Ohrid, Veles, ≈†tip, Koƒçani, Gostivar and Strumica. It has more than 50 lakes and sixteen mountains higher than 2,000 meters (6,550†ft).
The country is a member of the UN and the Council of Europe and a member of La Francophonie, the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. Since December 2005 it is also a candidate for joining the European Union and has applied for NATO membership.

The lands governed by the Republic of Macedonia were previously the southernmost part of the Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia. Its today international borders were fixed roughly as it was part of the SFR Yugoslavia shortly after the World War II. In 1944, the Anti-Fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia declared the "People's Republic of Macedonia" as a separate nation within federal Yugoslavia.

The first recorded states on the territory of today's Republic of Macedonia was the kingdom of Paionia, which covered the northern and eastern regions of the Axius River valley and the kingdom of Macedon[10][11] which occupied the Lyncestis and Pelagonia regions.[12] Philip II of Macedon took over the southernmost regions of Paeonia in 336 BC and founded the city of Heraclea Lyncestis, in what is now Bitola.[13] Philip's son Alexander the Great conquered the remainder of Paeonia and incorporated it in his empire. Subsequently the territory was conquered by Rome, and the region became part of two Roman provinces. The greater part was within Macedonia Salutaris, but the northern border regions, inhabited by the Dardani, became a part of Moesia Superior.[14] By 400 AD the Paeonians had lost their identity, and Paeonia was merely a geographic term within the Macedonian region.

During the 580s, Byzantine literature attests to the Slavs raiding Byzantine territories in the region of Macedonia. The Slavic peoples that settled in the region of Macedonia accepted Christianity as their own religion around the 9th century, during the reign of prince Boris I of Bulgaria, and these lands became part of the Bulgarian Empire.
In 1014, Emperor Basil II finally defeated the armies of Tsar Samuil and by 1018 the Byzantines restored control over Macedonia (and all of the Balkans) for the first time since the 600s. However, by the late 12th century, inevitable Byzantine decline saw the region become contested by various political entities, including a brief Norman occupation in the 1080s. In the early 13th century, a revived Bulgarian Empire gained control of the region. Plagued by political difficulties the empire did not last and the wider geographical Macedonia region fell once again under Byzantine control. In the 14th century, it became part of the Serbian Empire, who saw themselves as liberators of their Slavic kin from Byzantine despotism. Skopje became the capital of Tsar Stefan Dusan's empire.
With Dusan's death, a weak successor and power struggles between nobles divided the Balkans once again. This coincided with the entry of the Ottoman Turks into Europe. With no major Balkan power left to defend Christianity, the entire Balkans fell to Turkish rule†‚Äî which would remain so for five centuries.

Ottoman rule over the region was considered harsh. Several movements whose goals were the establishment of autonomous Macedonia, encompassing the entire region of Macedonia, began to arise in the late 1800s; the earliest of these was the Bulgarian Macedonian-Adrianople Revolutionary Committees, later transformed to SMORO. In 1905 it was renamed as Internal Macedonian-Adrianople Revolutionary Organization (IMARO) and after World War I the organization separated into the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization (IMRO) and the Internal Thracian Revolutionary Organisation (ITRO). The early organization did not proclaim any ethnic identities; it was officially open to "...uniting all the disgruntled elements in Macedonia and the Adrianople region, regardless of their nationality..."[15] The majority of its members were however Slavic/Bulgarian-speakers.[15] In 1903, IMRO organised the Ilinden-Preobrazhenie Uprising against the Ottomans, which after some initial successes, including the forming of the Krushevo Republic, was crushed with much loss of life. The uprising and the forming of the Krushevo Republic are considered the cornerstone and precursors to the eventual establishment of the Republic of Macedonia.

Following the two Balkan wars of 1912 and 1913 and the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire, most of its European held territories were divided between Greece, Bulgaria and Serbia. The territory of the present-day Republic of Macedonia (Vardar Macedonia) was then named Ju≈æna Srbija, "Southern Serbia". After the First World War, Serbia became part of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. In 1929, the Kingdom was officially renamed the Kingdom of Yugoslavia and divided into provinces called banovinas. Southern Serbia, including all of what is now the Republic of Macedonia, became known as the Vardar Banovina of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.

