Immortal Technique
Felipe Coronel, better known by the stage name Immortal Technique, is an American rapper and political activist. He was born in Lima, Peru and raised in Harlem, New York. [2] Most of his lyrics focus on political issues. The views expressed in his lyrics are largely a mixture of commentary on issues such as politics, poverty, religion, social class and racism.
He has been offered a deal with at least one major record label,[3] but he has never signed to any. Immortal Technique has voiced a desire to keep control over his production,[4] and has stated in his music that record companies, not artists themselves, profit the most from mass production and marketing of music.


Felipe Coronel was born February 19, 1978 in a military hospital at Lima.[1] His family immigrated in 1980 to Harlem, New York to escape the ongoing internal conflict in Peru.[5] During his teenage years he was arrested multiple times and eventually incarcerated for aggravated assault.[6] After being paroled, he began to emerge as a notable figure in New York's underground hip hop scene following his success in rap battles.[7] During his education at Pennsylvania State University, Coronel spent a year in prison.[1]

In 2001, Immortal Technique released his first album Revolutionary Vol. 1 without the help of a record label or distribution, instead using money he had made from winning various rap battles[7]. In November 2002, he was listed by The Source as the month's featured "Unsigned Hype", which highlights artists that are not signed to a record label. The following year, in September 2003, he received the coveted "Hip Hop Quotable" in The Source for a song entitled "Industrial Revolution" from his second album[7]. Consequently, since he did not have a record deal or distribution at the time, Immortal Technique is the only rapper in history to have a "Hip Hop Quotable" while being unsigned[7]. He released his second album Revolutionary Vol. 2 in 2003. In 2004, Viper Records and, in 2005, Babygrande Records have re-released Immortal Technique's debut, Revolutionary Vol. 1, to make it available to a wider audience.
Point of No Return from Revolutionary Vol 2 was used as the entrance theme for Rashad Evans during the UFC 88 Main Event between Chuck Liddell and Rashad Evans.

Before the presidential race in November 2004, the Immortal Technique song "Bin Laden", (also known as 'Tell The Truth'[8]) featuring Mos Def (and later featuring Eminem, using backmasking) and produced by DJ Green Lantern, emerged on Shade 45: Sirius Bizness. However, it took almost half a year until it was officially released on a 12" vinyl single in the summer of 2005. The single also contained a remix of the song featuring hip-hop legends Chuck D of Public Enemy and KRS-One. The song lyrics imply that George W. Bush and previous administrations were largely responsible for the September 11, 2001 attacks. Bush's said responsibility was not specifically a direct one. In fact, Immortal wrote on his website (9/7/05 news post), "I wrote in "The Cause of Death" that Bush was not responsible directly, that he didn't plan 9/11, but he and his [administration] definitely benefited from the end result of all those people dying." Immortal Technique's third studio album, The 3rd World was released on June 24, 2008. The Third World was given an Underground Gold Award selling over 54 000 copies. He is set to release his next albums, Revolutionary Vol. 3. [9] and The Middle Passage, though a release date has yet to be confirmed for either. 
Immortal Technique has described himself as a "socialist guerrilla". Immortal Technique's music is inspired by historical and often political figures such as Malcolm X, Che Guevara, César Chávez, Augusto César Sandino, Marcus Garvey, and Túpac Amaru II.[10]
Immortal Technique is also a co-founder of the Grassroots Artists MovEment (G.A.ME), which provides health care for the underground artists with whom it works.[12]



