Ex Machina (comics)
Ex Machina is an American creator-owned comic book series created by Brian K. Vaughan and Tony Harris, and published by DC Comics under the Wildstorm imprint.
The series details the life of Mitchell Hundred (also known as the Great Machine), the world's first and only superhero, who, in the wake of his actions on 9/11, is elected Mayor of New York City. The story is set during Hundred's term in office, and interwoven with flashbacks to his past as the Great Machine. Through this, the series explores both the political situations Hundred finds himself in, and the mysteries surrounding his superpowers.

Ex Machina launched in 2004 as part of DC Comics' Wildstorm imprint. Vaughan has stated that the series will run for fifty issues.[1][2]
The title of the comic comes from the Latin phrase 'deus ex machina', and is also a reference to Hundred's superhero persona, the Great Machine, in that he is now an 'ex-Machine'. In the first issue, Mitchell explains that he chose the name "Great Machine" based on a quote about society by Thomas Jefferson. Accordingly, one of the series' recurring themes is the tendency of citizens to become overly reliant on their government and constantly expect it to save them.
Vaughan has said that the comic was "born out of my anger with what passes for our current political leadership (on both sides of the aisle)".[3]
Vaughan has admitted seeing the series as a means to explore real-world contemporary politics as well, but states that discussing themes overtly is not something he prefers. [4]


Before becoming a superhero and mayor, Hundred was a civil engineer. His colleagues say that he knows more about the Brooklyn Bridge than anyone else alive. He was raised by a highly political single mother; this, and his being a keen reader of DC Comics, inspired his life choices. There is an "is he or isn't he" aspect to his sexuality; on several occasions, characters ask him directly if he is gay, and Hundred does not directly reply in the affirmative or the negative.
As the result of an explosion from a suspected alien device at the foot of the Brooklyn Bridge, Hundred is left permanently scarred (he has markings on the left side of his face and body remniscent of a circuit board or electrodes); and develops the ability to communicate with and command mechanical devices. This includes anything from guns, to cellphones, to cars (but not, as Hundred discovered, a device as simple as a bow-and-arrow). At times they will not necessarily obey him, and even have the ability to lie to him. The reason for these abilities is unrevealed.
As the Great Machine, Mitchell Hundred utilizes many devices he designed after his accident. He wears a rocket backpack that allows him to fly, and uses ray guns and taser gloves as weapons. He has entrusted Kremlin and Rick Bradbury with possession of machines which disrupt his powers. He built them based on a dream (along with some of his crime-fighting weapons), and expects them to be used as a contingency measure in case he ever goes mad with power.
In the end of the "Smoke Smoke" arc, Hundred is seen smoking pot in order to drown out the constant stream of noise from the machines.
Hundred is visually based on a real-life friend of Tony Harris. In fact most of the panels in the comic are storyboarded using posed photographs of various stand-ins for the characters).[5]










Ex Machina has been collected in the following trade paperbacks:
In addition, Ex Machina Deluxe Edition Volume 1 was released on July 15, 2008. This hardcover collection encompassed the first 11 issues.[6]

Ex Machina won the 2005 Eisner Award for Best New Series.

On 14 July 2005, New Line Cinema announced that they have picked up the rights to make a movie version.[7]




