John Yoo
John Choon Yoo (born June 10, 1967 in Seoul)[1] is an American attorney, former official in the U.S. Department of Justice, and law professor at the University of California, Berkeley School of Law. He is currently serving as a visiting professor of law at the Chapman University School of Law in Orange County, California. Yoo has authored two books on presidential power and the war on terrorism, as well as numerous journal and newspaper articles.[2] He has held the Fulbright Distinguished Chair in Law at the University of Trento and has also been a visiting law professor at the Free University of Amsterdam and the University of Chicago. Since 2003, Yoo has also worked as a visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative and libertarian think tank.
Yoo is best known for his work from 2001 to 2003 in the Department of Justice's Office of Legal Counsel under the George W. Bush Administration. Yoo assisted the U.S. Attorney General in his function as legal advisor to President Bush.[3][4][5] In the Justice Department, Yoo's expansive view of Presidential power led to a close relationship with the office of Vice President Dick Cheney.[4] Yoo played a significant role in the legal justification for the Bush Administration's policy in the War on Terror, arguing that the Geneva Conventions did not apply to the War in Afghanistan or to the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, justifying waterboarding and other "enhanced interrogation techniques", asserting that the President was not bound by the War Crimes Act, and providing a legal opinion backing the Bush Administration's warrantless wiretapping program.[4][5][6][7]
Yoo's legal opinions were controversial within the Bush Administration. Secretary of State Colin Powell strongly opposed the invalidation of the Geneva Conventions,[7], while U.S. Navy general counsel Alberto Mora campaigned internally against what he saw as the "catastrophically poor legal reasoning" and dangerous extremism of Yoo's legal opinions.[8] In December 2003, Yoo's memos on torture and permissible interrogation techniques were repudiated by the Office of Legal Counsel, then under the direction of Jack Goldsmith, as legally unsound.[8]
Yoo's contribution to these memos has remained a source of controversy after his departure from the Justice Department; he was called to testify before the House Judiciary Committee in 2008 in defense of his role.[9] The Justice Department's Office of Professional Responsibility has been investigating Yoo's work since 2004, and is completing a report which is said to be sharply critical of his legal justification for waterboarding and other interrogation techniques.[10][11] In 2009, a judge and certain prosecutors in Spain launched an investigation of Yoo for war crimes on the basis of his work as an official in the Bush administration.[12] These efforts were "strongly criticized" by Spanish Attorney General Candido Conde-Pumpido, who stated that the proceedings against Yoo and the other Americans named in the complaint were a legal "artifice."[13]

As an infant, Yoo emigrated with his parents from South Korea to the United States. He grew up in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, graduating from the Episcopal Academy in 1985, and graduated with a B.A., summa cum laude in American history from Harvard University in 1989 and Yale Law School in 1992. Yoo clerked for United States Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas and U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit Judge Laurence Silberman. From 1995 to 1996, he was general counsel for the Senate Judiciary Committee. Yoo is an active member of the Federalist Society. He is married to the daughter of Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Peter Arnett.

Yoo's academic work includes analysis of the history of judicial review in the U.S. Constitution. (See discussion in the Marbury v. Madison entry.) Yoo's book The Powers of War and Peace : The Constitution and Foreign Affairs after 9/11 was praised in an Op-Ed in The Washington Times written by Nicholas J. Xenakis, an assistant editor at The National Interest.[14] It was cited during the Senate hearings for then-U.S. Supreme Court nominee Samuel Alito by Senator Joseph Biden, who "pressed Alito to denounce John Yoo's controversial defense of presidential initiative in taking the nation to war."[15] Yoo is known as a public opponent of the Chemical Weapons Convention[16]
Yoo was the principal author of the August 2002 legal memo that gave the C.I.A. its first detailed legal approval for waterboarding and other harsh interrogation treatments. He is now the subject of an investigation by the United States Justice Department's ethics office about his legal analyis. The draft ethics report has been described as highly critical of Yoo.


The following memos are some of those known or believed to have been authored, in whole or in part, by John Yoo during his tenure at the Office of Legal Counsel; some remain classified, and in some cases dates are approximate for that reason. (See Jan. 5, 2005 letter from Senator Patrick Leahy requesting some of these documents, and the Obama Administration's March 2, 2009 release of many of the memos.)

After he left the Department of Justice, it was revealed that Yoo authored memos, including co-authoring the Bybee memo defining torture and American habeas corpus obligations narrowly.[26][27] The memos, known today as the "torture memos,"[28][29] advocate enhanced interrogation techniques, while pointing out that refuting the Geneva Conventions would reduce the possibility American officials and surrogates face future prosecution under the US War Crimes Act of 1996 for actions taken in the War on Terror.[30] In addition, a new definition of torture was issued. Most actions that fall under the international definition do not fall within this new definition advocated by the U.S.[31] Several top military lawyers, including Alberto J. Mora, reported that policies allowing methods equivalent to torture were officially handed down from the highest levels of the administration, and led an effort within the Department of Defense to put a stop to those policies and instead mandate non-coercive interrogation standards.[32]
On December 1, 2005, Yoo appeared in a debate in Chicago with Notre Dame professor Doug Cassel, a long time human rights legal scholar. During the debate Cassel asked Yoo "If the president deems that he's got to torture somebody, including by crushing the testicles of the person's child, there is no law that can stop him?" to which Yoo replied "No treaty." Cassel followed up with " Also no law by Congress -- that is what you wrote in the August 2002 memo..." to which Yoo replied "I think it depends on why the President thinks he needs to do that."[33][34]
On June 26, 2008, Yoo and Vice President Dick Cheney's chief of staff and former counsel David Addington testified before the House Judiciary Committee in a contentious hearing on detainee treatment, interrogation methods and the extent of executive branch authority.[35][36][37]video

Yoo also authored the October 23, 2001 memo asserting that the President had sufficient power to allow the NSA to monitor the communications of US citizens on US soil without a warrant because the fourth amendment does not apply. Or, as another memo says in one of its footnotes, "Our office recently concluded that the Fourth Amendment had no application to domestic military operations."[18][38]
That interpretation is used to assert that the normal mandatory requirement of a warrant, under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, could be ignored.[38]

Yoo suggested that since the primary task of the President during a time of war is protecting certain US citizens[citation needed], the President has inherent authority to subordinate independent government agencies, and plenary power to use force abroad.[39] Yoo contends that the Congressional check on Presidential war making power comes from its power of the purse, and that the President, and not the Congress or courts, has sole authority to interpret international treaties such as the Geneva Convention "because treaty interpretation is a key feature of the conduct of foreign affairs".[40] His positions on executive power are controversial because it is suggested that the theory holds that the President's war powers place him above any law.[40][41][42][43]

Yoo was a strong critic of what he viewed as the Clinton administration's use of the powers of what he termed the "imperial presidency". For instance, Yoo wrote:
Yoo further stated, in regards to the Clinton administration's use of executive power:
Yoo declared in 2000, at a conference regarding executive power:
