Placebo
The placebo effect is a medical phenomenon where the results of a medical treatment are affected by the patient's ideas about how effective the treatment is. The term is especially used when a patient responds dramatically to a physiologically inactive treatment. Inactive treatments used to induce the placebo effect are called placebos; inert "sugar" pills and sham surgeries are typical examples.
The placebo effect is a pervasive phenomenon in medicine and placebos are widely used in contemporary healthcare.[3] The placebo effect sheds light on the brain's role in physical health, and allows drugs to be compared against inert equivalents in medical studies. The deceptive nature of the placebo creates tension between the Hippocratic Oath and the honesty of the doctor-patient relationship.


In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, a placebo was a term, often derogative, for the treatments doctors gave to please a patient.[4] There was no implication that it was also inert or sham.[4][5] In the middle of the twentieth century, clinical trials as to the effectiveness of medical treatments started to use control conditions in which people received inert or sham treatment, and the word “placebo” shifted to its present sense of a drug, surgery, or other medical procedure that gained its effectiveness due to the expectations of a person not its actual pharmacological or physiological action.[5] The term “placebo effect” arose also around this time.[4]
The word placebo itself originated from the Latin for I will please. It is in Latin text in the Bible (Psalm 114:1–9, Vulgate version by Jerome, “Placebo Domino in regione vivorum”, “I shall please the Lord in the land of the living”). Jerome translated as "I will please" (placebo), the Hebrew word "ethalech", "I will walk with" as in "I will be in step with".[6] This word gave its name, placebo, to the Office of the Dead church service. From that, a singer of placebo became associated with someone who falsely claimed a connection to the deceased to get a share of the funeral meal, and hence a flatterer, and so a deceptive act to please.[4]

Placebos can be:



The phenomenon appears to defy explanation. It has been observed that "If a placebo treatment consists of an inert tablet, how is it possible for it to have any effect on the patient? The idea of a placebo effect seems illogical”.[27]
There are four scientific questions: How does the brain respond to placebos? How can the brain produce placebo effects? What about placebos causes this? And why does the brain have this capacity to produce placebo effects?

Functional imaging upon placebo analgesia shows that it links to the activation, and increased functional correlation between this activation, in the anterior cingulate, prefrontal, orbitofrontal and insular cortices, nucleus accumbens, amygdala, the brainstem periaqueductal gray matter,[28][29][30] and the spinal cord.[31][32] These changes can act upon the brain’s early stages of information processing: research using evoked brain potentials upon painful laser pulses, for example, finds placebo effects upon the N2–P2, a biphasic negative–positive complex response, the N2 peak of which is at about 230 ms, and the P2 one at about 380 ms.[33] They occur not only during placebo analgesia but after receiving the analgesic placebo (the areas are different here, and involve the medial prefrontal cortex, posterior parietal cortex and inferior parietal lobule).[34]
Different areas in the higher brain have different functions. The prefrontal involvement could be related to recalling the placebo and maintaining its cognitive presence in a “self-reinforcing feedback loop” (during pain an individual recalls having taken the placebo and reduced pain reinforces its status as an analgesic).[35] The rostral anterior cingulate cortex and its subcortical connectivity could related to the expectation of potential pain stimuli[36][37]
The higher brain works by regulating subcortical processes. High placebo responses link with enhanced dopamine and mu-opioid activity in the circuitry for reward responses and motivated behavior of the nucleus accumbens, and conversely, anti-analgesic nocebos responses were associated with deactivation in this part of the brain of dopamine and opioid release.[29] (It has been known that placebo analgesia depends upon the release in the brain of endogenous opioids since 1978[38].) Such analgesic placebos activation changes processing lower down in the brain by enhancing the descending inhibition through the periaqueductal gray[29] on spinal nociceptive reflexes, while the expectations of anti-analgesic nocebos acts in the opposite way to block this.[39]
The brain is also involved in less studied ways upon nonanalgesic placebo effects:
Present functional imaging upon placebo analgesia has been summarized as showing that the placebo response is “mediated by "top-down" processes dependent on frontal cortical areas that generate and maintain cognitive expectancies. Dopaminergic reward pathways may underlie these expectancies”.[46] And “Diseases lacking major “top-down” or cortically based regulation may be less prone to placebo-related improvement”.[47]

The brain has control over the body processes effected by placebos. Pain, motor fatigue and fever are directly organized by the brain. Other processes usually regulated by the body such as the immune system are also controlled indirectly through the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system.
Research upon conditioning in animals shows the brain can learn control over them. In conditioning, a neutral stimulus saccharin is paired in a drink with an agent, that produces an unconditioned response. For example, that agent might be cyclophosphamide that causes immunosuppression. After learning this pairing, the taste of saccharin by itself through neural top down control created immunosuppression, as a new conditioned response.[48] Such conditioning has been found to effect a diverse variety of basic physiological processes not just in the immune system but ones such as serum iron levels, oxidative DNA damage levels, and insulin secretion. This work was originally done on rats, however, the same conditioning of basic physiological processes can also occur in humans. Recent reviews have argued the placebo effect is due to top down control by the brain for immunity[49] and pain.[50] Pacheco-López and colleagues have raised the possibility of “neocortical-sympathetic-immune axis providing neuroanatomical substrates that might explain the link between placebo/conditioned and placebo/expectation responses.”[49]pp 441

Evolutionary medicine identifies many symptoms such as fever, pain, and sickness behavior as evolved responses to protect or enhance the recovery from infection and injury. Fever, for example, is an evolved self-treatment that removes bacteria or viruses through raised body temperature. These evolved responses, however, also have a cost that depending upon circumstances can outweigh their benefit (due to this, for example, there is a reduction in fever during malnutrition or late pregnancy). According to the health management system theory proposed by Nicholas Humphrey, the brain has been selected to ensure that evolved responses are deployed only when the cost benefit is biologically advantageous. The brain to do this factors in a variety of information sources, including in humans, the likelihood derived from beliefs that the body will get well without deploying its costly evolved responses. One such source of information is the knowledge the body is receiving care and treatment. The placebo effect in this perspective arises when false information about medications misleads the health management system about the likelihood of getting well so that it selects not to deploy an evolved self-treatment.[51]

Placebos could shape the brain’s top down control over the body through several processes. One is directly through a conditioning process. People can be conditioned by past experience, for example, to associate a reduction of pain with the application of a cream. The reduction in pain can be experimental arranged by surreptitiously reducing a painful stimuli after the cream is applied.[52]
Another possibility is that it also involves the learning of verbal based expectations. In this case, a person is told that a cream is analgesic but without that cream having any surreptitiously associated pain reduction. Both conditioning and verbal expectations play a role in placebo effect,[53] and make different kinds of contribution. Conditioning has a longer lasting effect,[54] and can effect earlier stages of information processing.[55] A conditioned pain reduction can totally removed when its existence is explained to them.[56]
As Irving Kirsch has noted “cognitive learning evolved from more primitive noncognitive processes. The adaptive advantage of cognition is increased response flexibility. For it to convey that benefit, however, it must be capable of overriding the influence of simpler automatic processes. Thus, the higher up the phylogenetic scale, the smaller the role of nonconscious conditioning processes and the larger the role of cognition.[57]342

Motivation may contribute to the placebo effect. The active goals of an individual changes their somatic experience by altering the detection and interpretation of expectation-congruent symptoms, and by changing the behavioral strategies a person pursues.[58][59]
Motivation may link to the meaning through which people experience illness and treatment. Such meaning is derives from the culture in which they live and which informs them about the nature of illness and how it responds to treatment. Research upon the placebo treatment of gastric and duodenal ulcers shows that this varies widely with society: those in Germany having a high rate placebo effect while those in Brazil a low one. [60]

The physiological effect of a placebo depends upon its suggested or anticipated action. A placebo described as a muscle relaxant will cause muscle relaxation and if the opposite, muscle tension.[61] A placebo presented as a stimulant will have this effect on heart rhythm, and blood pressure, but when administered as a depressant, the opposite effect.[62]
Related to this power of expectation is the person’s belief that the treatment that they are taking is real: in both those taking real drugs and those taking placebos, those people that believe they are taking the real treatment (whether they in fact are or not) show a stronger effect, and vice versa, those that think they are taking the placebo (whether they are or not) a lesser one. This effect has been found in the success of therapies as diverse as nicotine replacement therapy,[63] the transplantation of human embryonic neurons into the brains of those with advanced Parkinson's disease.[64] and acupuncture analgesia after dental treatment.[65] Those who think a treatment will work display a stronger placebo effect than those who do not, for example people sceptical about acupuncture analgesia show less placebo effect than those confident that it is a highly effective therapy.[66]
Placebo effects are strong when a treatment is adminstered overtly as this has a greater impact on a person’s expectations than the covert administration of a treatment. Pain killing and anxiety reducing drugs that are infused secretly without an individual’s knowledge are less effective (in the latter case no more so than saline) than when a patient knows they are receiving them. Likewise, the effects of stimulation from implanted electrodes in the brains of those with advanced Parkinson’s disease are greater when they are aware they are receiving this stimulation.[67]
The placebo effect can work selectively. If an analgesic placebo cream is applied on one hand, it will reduce pain only in that hand and not elsewhere on the body[68] If a person is given
