Keysi Fighting Method
Keysi Fighting Method (KFM) is a method of self defense that is based on natural fighting instincts and several street fighting techniques, developed by Justo Diéguez Serrano from his fighting experiences in the streets of Spain. The system was founded also with the help of Andy Norman.[1]
The Keysi Fighting Method became famous after it was used in the fighting choreography of the movies Batman Begins and its sequel, The Dark Knight. Both founders, Justo Diéguez and Andy Norman, are certified Jeet Kune Do instructors under Dan Inosanto[2].

KFM makes use of multiple attacking ranges, with or without weapons. The KFM trademark is the thinking man (Pensador) and thinking man attack (pensataq), which makes use of a tight defensive shape to protect the most precious part of the body, the head, and smashes and opens up the opponent for the finish using all ranges of strikes - punches, hammer fists, kicks, knees, head butts, and the sharp elbows, all at high, middle and low lines on the opponent. Unlike many martial arts, KFM tends to get into extreme close quarters when in combat. From the Pensador defense a variety of counter attacks to vital targets (such as the biceps, kidneys or solar plexus) are often launched. KFM also relies on understanding how people typically move or attack in a fight so that when striking, the opponent's body moves to expose further targets.
The shape of the thinking man represents the unification of the mind and body.
Another aspect of KFM is its "360-degree" approach to multi-assailant attacks whether standing, kneeling, sitting or lying down. Part of KFM's philosophy is the redefining of the terms "predator and prey" as well, where the would-be victim becomes the predator and the would-be attackers his/her prey.
KFM shares similarity in principles with modern street fighting systems such as Sari-An and Bakbakan.
Most schools offering KFM are located in Europe, but seminars have been introducing it to America where instruction has now been established in Texas, Georgia, Maryland, Delaware and Orlando, Florida.





