Westboro Baptist Church
The Westboro Baptist Church (WBC) is an independent Baptist church headed by Fred Phelps and based in Topeka, Kansas, United States. The organization is monitored by the Anti-Defamation League,[1] and is classified as a hate group by the Southern Poverty Law Center.[2][3] Its first public service was held on the afternoon of Sunday, November 27, 1955.[4]
WBC is not affiliated with any known Baptist conventions or associations. The church describes itself as following Primitive Baptist and Calvinist principles, though mainstream Primitive Baptists reject Westboro Baptist Church and Phelps, regarding them as unaffiliated to the Primitive Baptists.[5] The views that distinguish Westboro Baptist Church are views that most Baptists and Calvinists do not recognize, and do not consider to be in any way characteristically Baptist or Calvinistic.[citation needed]

All the principals of the Phelps Chartered law firm,[6] a firm founded by WBC founder Fred Phelps, are members of WBC. Phelps Chartered handles most of WBC's legal work and has received significant awards of attorney's fees from the Civil Rights Attorney's Fees Award Act of 1976 when WBC had been improperly prevented from picketing.[7]

The group carries out daily picketing in Topeka (purportedly six per day with fifteen on Sunday, "Lord willing", according to the index page of its main website[8]) and travels nationally to picket the funerals of gay victims of murder, gay-bashing or death related to AIDS, as well as other events related or peripherally related to gay people. The WBC website states that the church participated in over 41,000 protests in over 650 cities since 1991 (as of March 2009). [9] They have been known to protest outside theaters in Topeka, under the premise that live theaters (especially Broadway musical productions) are a haven for homosexuality, as well as protesting at Kansas City Chiefs football games, and live pop concerts in Topeka. While being filmed by Louis Theroux they were shown picketing a local appliance store because the store "sold Swedish vacuum cleaners," which the church viewed as supportive of homosexuality due to the Swedish governments' imprisonment of a pastor critical of homosexuality.[10] They have also shown interest in picketing productions of the play The Laramie Project.[11] Recently they have shifted their interest to picketing at the funerals of soldiers killed in the Iraq War, believing this to be more of "God's judgment" on America. The FAQ section of the website states that, in their view, soldiers did not join the military out of a sense of patriotism, but because they are "lazy, incompetent idiots" unable to find work elsewhere.[12] Some states, including Kansas, have passed laws prohibiting picketing at funerals. Westboro has also protested at the funerals of people ranging from Fred Rogers to Coretta Scott King to Jerry Falwell. In the autumn of 2007 the father of a fallen Marine whose funeral was picketed by the WBC was awarded $5 million in damages by a jury.[13][14]
One of Westboro's followers estimated that the church spends $250,000 a year traveling around the world to picket.[15] In the 1990s the church won a series of lawsuits against the City of Topeka and Shawnee County for efforts taken to prevent or hinder WBC picketing. As a result, the church was awarded approximately $200,000 in attorney's fees and costs associated with the litigation. Otherwise, all of the church's money comes from the combined income of its congregants and money won in lawsuits against their opponents.
Phelps Sr., his supporters and members of his church attend the aforementioned gatherings, as well as other gay-related events, with signs bearing anti-gay slogans. Phelps Sr. has characterized the AIDS Memorial Quilt as "100,000 living fags slobberin' around 45,000 dead fags" and declared Elizabeth Taylor, a fundraiser for AIDS research, to be a "world-famous filthy Jew whore." Other regular anti-gay slogans of Westboro include "Homosexuality = Death," "Fags Die, God Laughs," "Matthew Shepard Rots in Hell," "AIDS: Kills Fags Dead" and "Ellen DeGeneres is a Lesbian Slut." (The latter was carried at an "Equality Rocks" rock concert and fundraiser; at the event DeGeneres commented that she was not offended so much by the slogan as the fact that they had drawn pockmarks all over her face on the poster.)
The group came into the national spotlight in 1998, when they were featured on CNN for picketing the funeral of Matthew Shepard, a young man from Wyoming who was beaten to death by two men because of his homosexuality. [16]
On January 25, 2004 Phelps picketed five churches (three Catholic and two Episcopalian) and the Federal Courthouse for allegedly legalizing same-sex marriages in Iowa. Two women married in Vermont had their marriage mistakenly annulled by a federal judge in Sioux City, Iowa. The ruling was quickly reversed. The community response was to hold several counter-protests and hold a large multi-faith service in the town's municipal auditorium. [17]
The group has also picketed Billy Graham revivals, alleging that the evangelist will burn in Hell for failing to propagate the "God Hates Fags" doctrine. In October 2004 the group protested Graham's mass meetings, calling the 85 year-old preacher a "Hell-bound false prophet".
In press releases, WBC referred to Topeka mayor James McClinton as a "wife-beating tyrant". McClinton, who is black, was portrayed in the press release as a gorilla in a suit with a swastika armband.[18]
On January 15, 2006 Westboro members protested the memorial of 2006 Sago Mine disaster victims claiming that the mining accident was God's revenge against America for its tolerance of homosexuality.[19] Footage of the protest, including several members dancing, was later shown on Fox News.
In July 2005 the Westboro Baptist Church declared its intention to picket the memorial service of Cpl. Carrie French in Boise, Idaho. French, aged 19 years old, was killed on June 5 in the Iraqi city of Kirkuk, where she served as an ammunition specialist with the 116th Brigade Combat Team's 145th Support Battalion. Her death is seen by the church as divine punishment of the United States. Phelps Sr. was quoted as saying, "Our attitude toward what's happening with the war is [that] the Lord is punishing this evil nation for abandoning all moral imperatives that are worth a dime."[20]
The Westboro Baptist Church declared its intention to picket the funerals of other soldiers as well, and did so in August 2005. A group from the church protested at the funeral of Spc. Edward Myers, a soldier from St. Joseph, Missouri, who died in Iraq. Shirley Phelps-Roper (one of Phelps Sr.'s daughters and the main author of the WBC Epics and Hate Letters) told a television reporter, "Who would serve a nation that is Godless and has flipped off, defiantly defied, defiantly flipped off, the Lord their God?" She then reiterated her belief that Myers was burning in Hell.[21]
On January 26, 2008 they traveled to Jacksonville, NC, home of Camp Lejeune to protest the United States Marine Corps in the wake of the murder of Maria Lauterbach. A five member group of females protested, stomping on the American Flag and shouting slogans such as "1,2,3,4, God Hates the Marine Corps". A group of over forty counter protesters arrived and one spat in Shirley Phelps-Roper's face.[22] Another counter protest was held across town, which attracted over 150 counterprotesters.
On February 2, 2008 they traveled to Salt Lake City, Utah to picket during the funeral of former LDS Church president Gordon B. Hinckley, displaying picket signs criticizing Hinckley for being a "lying false prophet" and "leading millions of people astray." The organization also criticized Hinckley for being too accepting of homosexuals, accusing him of having an "ambiguous voice" about homosexuality rather than taking a firm stand against it. One picketer stated that the protest was because he "preached that God loves all his children, including the gay ones."[23] Police had a hard time determining whether the demonstration met the guidelines of protected free speech. It was said at least one of the picket signs read, "Hinckley is in hell."[24]
Members of the Westboro Baptist Church have protested in Utah before. In June, three members of the group demonstrated a few blocks away from a funeral of a South Jordan soldier. The protesters held signs displaying messages such as "pray for more dead soldiers."[25]
On April 10, 2008, Westboro picketed the funerals of three students who were killed in a house fire at the University of Wisconsin-Stout in Menomonie, Wisconsin. Around 1,000 students showed up and drove off the protesters after fifteen minutes.[26]
On May 14, 2008, two days after the deadly 2008 Sichuan earthquake, they issued a press release thanking God for the great earthquake that caused heavy loss of life in China, and "pray for many more earthquakes to kill many more thousands of impudent and ungrateful Chinese". In the article they also called Chinese people "vile oriental [sic] ingrates", and declared that "God hates China". [27]
In August 2008, Westboro announced plans to protest in Winnipeg, Canada at the funeral of Tim McLean, a carnival worker who was beheaded on a Greyhound Canada bus.[28] While a small number of Church members succeeded in crossing the border despite orders to prevent the groups from entering Canada, they never showed up at the funeral.[29]
In December 2008, as a result of an atheist sign displayed near a nativity scene as part of a Christmas display in the Washington State Capitol, and the controversy which ensued, Westboro Baptist Church requested a display which included the text "Santa Claus will take you to hell", among other incendiary wording.[30][31] This was in addition to several other groups requesting a wide assortment of other items to be displayed in the state capitol.
In February 2009, the group protested at the death of one of the Buffalo area plane crash's victims. Students from the nearby University at Buffalo and the Buffalo area held a peaceful counter protest, holding up white sheets to shield the victim's family from the Phelps. A motorcycle brigade revving their engines drowned out the Phelps.[32]

The church frequently announces protests in advance on their website. Occasionally, the church has accepted offers for radio air time in exchange for canceling an announced protest.[33][34]

In 1993 Charles F. Hockenbarger, Karl Hockenbarger, Timothy Phelps, Jonathan Phelps, Phelps Sr. and Margie Phelps were brought up on a variety of criminal charges stemming from information gathered following a raid on Westboro Baptist. Several charges were later dropped; the trials that followed saw every member of Westboro Baptist Church over the age of fifteen testifying in the defense of their family and fellow congregants; over 100 defense witnesses were called in all. Timothy Phelps, Charles F. Hockenbarger and Karl Hockenbarger were all found not guilty. Jon Phelps was found guilty of witness intimidation and misdemeanor battery, and has defended the actions that led to that arrest and guilty verdict as recently as October 11, 2006 on Midweek Politics. Margie Phelps was found guilty of filing a false report and Phelps Sr. was found guilty of disorderly conduct as defined by aggravated intimidation of a witness. All three lost their appeals. All six filed lawsuits against the city and took their cases to appeals court, where their lawsuits were dismissed.
In 1995 Phelps Sr.'s eldest grandson, Benjamin Phelps, was convicted of assault and disorderly conduct after spitting into the face of a passerby during a picket and then laughing. The security cameras of a nearby business caught the incident on tape.[35]
Also in 2004, Margie Phelps and her son Jacob were arrested for trespassing, disorderly conduct and failure to obey after disregarding a police officer's order that they were not allowed to enter a company's private property with chairs and stand on them with an upside down flag and a picket sign.[36]
In June 2007 Shirley Phelps-Roper was arrested in Nebraska, after demonstrating at the funeral of a soldier, and charged with contributing to the delinquency of a minor. The arrest resulted from her allowing her eight-year-old son to step on the American flag during the demonstration, an act which is illegal under Nebraska law. The defense contends that the child's actions were protected speech, and that the state law is unconstitutional. The prosecution claims that the demonstration was not intended as political speech, but as an incitement to violence, and that Phelps-Roper's conduct may also constitute child abuse.[37]

The Westboro Baptist Church attributes membership in most religious groups, such as the Roman Catholic Church or Islam, as akin to devil worship, and states these other churches to be "Satanic frauds preaching Arminian lies."[38] All non-Christian entities, non-Protestant Christian churches, and all Protestant Christian churches which do not strongly condemn homosexuality are said to be sending their members to Hell.

The church runs numerous websites such as GodHatesFags.com, GodHatesAmerica.com and others expressing condemnation of homosexuality.
The church bases its work around the belief expressed by its best known slogan and the address of its primary website, "God hates fags," and expresses the idea that every tragedy in the world is linked to homosexuality – specifically society's increasing tolerance and acceptance of the "Homosexual Agenda." The group maintains that God hates homosexuals above all other kinds of "sinners"[12] and that homosexuality should be a capital crime.[39]

Westboro is also anti-Catholic, claiming that the Roman Catholic Church is a "fag" church and that a third of Catholic priests are active homosexuals, seducing helpless children and women; Westboro Baptist refers to priests as "vampires" and "Draculas" and talks of Catholic priests sucking semen out of children's genitals like vampires suck blood from their victims. In addition, WBC calls Pope Benedict XVI such epithets as "The Godfather of Pedophiles" and "Pervert Pope". In April 2008 the WBC protested Pope Benedict XVI during a papal visit in New York City.
The WBC launched a website called Priests Rape Boys in which they criticize the Roman Catholic Church because of the Catholic sex abuse scandal, saying, “Every time any person gives any amount of money to the Catholic Church, that person is paying the salary of pedophile rapists.”[40]
The WBC describes the Roman Catholic Church as, “the largest, most well-funded and organized pedophile group in the history of man” [41] and goes on to say that, “There are over 1 billion Catholics in the world—that's one out of every six people alive today—and every single one of them will split Hell wide open when they die—period. And there is nothing they can do about it.” The WBC then goes on to disrespect the Eucharist saying, “does anyone really think that in between the time that the priests diddle the little boys and then feed the idolaters the goofy 'eucharist' wafers, that they even wash their hands?”[40]
Westboro Baptist operates three separate websites related to this issue, though two are not yet operational.

Though the main purpose of the Priests Rape Boys website is to criticize Catholics, the WBC also criticizes several mainline Protestant churches on the website, including, Methodists, Presbyterians, Lutherans, Episcopalians and Baptists. The WBC explains that their, “preachers have shirked their responsibility to tell people the truth about sin, and instead lie to them about what the Lord their God doth require of them. If these lying, false prophets told people the truth about what God says regarding those who suffer sin upon their neighbor (Lev. 19:17-18), there wouldn't be any butts in the seats when the plate got passed. These preachers are not preachers of righteousness, they are teachers having itching ears (2Tim 4:3), and they absolutely count on the abysmal bible illiteracy of their parishioners.” and goes on to say that, “'Priests rape boys' is indeed an air-tight, three word case against all of the mainline 'christian' churches - their preachers and members, without exception. They are all going to Hell!”[42][dead link]

The WBC also holds an anti-Orthodox stance, claiming that Orthodox Christians are indistinguishable from Roman Catholics. The WBC criticizes the Eastern Orthodox Church because of the Eastern Orthodox icons, claiming that they constitute idolatry. The WBC also criticizes the Eastern Orthodox Church for their veneration of the Virgin Mary, the Theotokos, saying, “There is no scripture that supports bowing down to kiss images, you idiots, or praying to Mary! She was a human being, who God predestinated to bring forth the Lord Jesus Christ, and to raise him. And she knew what her job was in this life. Instead of wrapping around that God-forsaken axle, FEAR GOD! Forget about praying to any false goddesses; GET RIGHT WITH GOD!!!” The WBC then concludes by calling the Eastern Orthodox Church “a fag church”.[43]

While the Westboro Baptist Church has made statements attempting to distance itself from racism
