Lego Mindstorms
LEGO Mindstorms is a line of Lego sets combining programmable bricks with electric motors, sensors, Lego bricks, and Lego Technic pieces (such as gears, axles, and beams).
Mindstorms originated from the programmable sensor blocks used in the line of educational toys. The first retail version of Lego Mindstorms was released in 1998 and marketed commercially as the Robotics Invention System (RIS). The current version was released in 2006 as Lego Mindstorms NXT.
The hardware and software roots of the Mindstorms Robotics Invention System kit go back to the programmable brick created at the MIT Media lab. This brick was programmed in Brick Logo. The first visual programming environment, called LEGOsheets,[1] for this brick was created by the University of Colorado in 1994 and was based on AgentSheets.
The original Mindstorms Robotics Invention System kit contained two motors, two touch sensors, and one light sensor. The NXT version has three servo motors and four sensors for touch, light, sound, and distance. Lego Mindstorms may be used to build a model of an embedded system with computer-controlled electromechanical parts. Many kinds of real-life embedded systems, from elevator controllers to industrial robots, may be modelled using Mindstorms.
Mindstorms kits are also sold and used as an educational tool, originally through a partnership between Lego and the MIT Media Laboratory.[2][3] The educational version of the products is called Lego Mindstorms for Schools, and comes with the ROBOLAB GUI-based programming software, developed at Tufts University[4] using the National Instruments LabVIEW as an engine. The only difference between the educational series, known as the "Challenge Set", and the consumer series, known as the "Inventor Set", is another included light sensor and several more gearing options.
Mindstorms is named after the book Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas by Seymour Papert.[5]


The first generation of Lego Mindstorms was built around a brick known as the RCX. It contains a 8-Bit collision detector Renesas H8/300 microcontroller as its internal CPU.It also contains 32K of RAM that stores the Firmware and User Programs. The brick is programmed by downloading a program (written in one of several available programming languages) from a Windows or Mac computer to the brick's RAM via a special infrared (IR) interface. After the user starts a program, an RCX-enabled Mindstorms creation may function totally on its own, acting on internal and external stimuli according to the programmed instructions. Also, two or several more RCX bricks can communicate with each other through the IR interface, enabling inter-brick cooperation or competition. In addition to the IR port, there are three sensor input ports and three motor output ports (also usable for lamps, etc). There is also an LCD that can display the battery level, the status of the input/output ports, which program is selected or running, and other information.
Version 1.0 RCX bricks feature a power adapter jack to allow continuous operation instead of the limited operation time when using batteries. In version 2.0 (as well as later 1.0s included in the RIS 1.5), the power adapter jack was removed. Power adapter-equipped RCX bricks are popular for stationary robotics projects (such as robot arms) or for controlling Lego model trains. In the latter context, the RCX needs to be programmed with Digital Command Control (DCC) software required for automated model train operation..
The IR interface on the RCX is able to communicate with Spybots, Scout Bricks, Lego Train, and the NXT (using a third-party infrared link sensor.) The RCX 1.0 IR receiver carrier frequency is 38.5 kHz, while the RCX 2.0 IR carrier frequency is 76 kHz. Both versions can transmit on either frequency.[6] The carrier signal is generated by one of the RCX's internal timers.
All versions of the RCX have a unique number printed on it. Little is known about the reasoning behind this number, except for the use of technical support and as a ID number of the RCX for your Lego Mindstorms account on the now-defunct Lego Mindstorms RCX website. The first RCX produced is marked "000001" and was on display at the Mindstorms 10th Anniversary event.[7]

Lego-supplied languages:
Popular third-party languages:

The Lego camera on its own is technically not a robotic toy; rather, it is a normal webcam (a Logitech Quickcam Web) packaged into a Lego shell. Being a normal webcam, the Lego Camera is, unlike most Mindstorms products, not programmable and is only usable connected to a PC or some other device that supports USB webcams.
The Lego camera is meant to be used with the included Vision Command software which can also interface with an RCX and thus enables creating robots with "vision". The software is capable of detecting different lightings, motion, and colors. It can also be used with any other software that uses a webcam. The webcam is capable of recording up to 30 frames per second. It also contains a microphone to record sound for videos.

Cybermaster was mainly sold in Europe and Australia/New Zealand, but was available for a short time in America via the Lego Club magazines. It was aimed at a younger audience as an early attempt of merging computer gaming with robotics and Lego. The Pbrick shares many, especially software, features with the RCX but differs in appearance and technical specifications: 1 output (plus 2 built-in) and 3 sensors.
Despite its obvious limitation it has a number of advantages over its 'big brother', the RCX.
This makes it very useful for various mobile platforms and performing basic motion/positioning tasks.
It talks the same protocol as the RCX but cannot communicate directly to it (due to IR vs RF) but with a repeater (a computer with 2 serial ports and a simple program) they can be integrated.

Sold as part of the Barcode Truck kit. This unit was the first programmable brick (or Pbrick). It features a single motor, a single touch sensor and a light sensor. It is programmed by setting it to 'learn' and using the light sensor to feed barcoded commands. The command set is very limited. Since barcode is just a series of variances in light, this form of command entry was dubbed VLL (Visual Light Link) and has been used in several later Lego models.

Lego also released a blue computer called the Scout, which has 2 sensor ports, 2 motor ports, and a built in light sensor, but no PC interface. It comes with the Robotics Discovery Set. The Scout can be programmed from a collection of built-in program combinations. In order to program the Scout, a user must enable "power mode" on it. The Scout can store one program.
There was a plan for Lego to create a booster set that allows you to program the Scout from a computer with a software such as RCX code. However, due to the complexity of this project, it was abandoned.
The RCX can control the Scout brick using the "Send IR Message" program block. The RCX does all of the controlling, and therefore can be programmed with the PC, while the Scout accepts commands. The Scout brick must have all of its options set to "off".
The Scout is also capable of using VLL to control a Micro Scout.

The Micro Scout was added as an entry level to Lego robotics. It is a very limited Pbrick with a single built-in light sensor and a single built-in motor. It has seven built-in programs and can be controlled by a Scout, Spybotics or RCX unit using VLL.
The unit was sold as part of the Droid Developer Kit (featuring R2D2) and later the Darkside Developer Kit (featuring an AT-AT Imperial Walker).

Spybotics was more of an attempt to expand on the Cybermaster line. The kits were sold together with a computer game where part was played on the computer and part was played by controlling the Spybot to solve a number of fixed missions. The Pbrick itself shares many features with the Cybermaster, but it has no tachometers or speedometers and a single integrated touch sensor.
It also features a light sensor which doubles as computer interface. This interface can also be used to connect to the Scout, Micro Scout and possibly the Codepilot using VLL. It has an expanded IR functionality allowing it to communicate with other Spybots or RCX units. The IR unit also has limited direction and range function, allowing it to track and locate other Spybots, IR Remote Controls/beacons or RCX units.

Lego Mindstorms NXT is a programmable robotics kit released by Lego in July 2006, replacing the first-generation LEGO Mindstorms kit.[8] The kit consists of 519 Technic pieces, 3 servo motors, 4 sensors (ultrasonic, sound, touch, and light), 7 wires, a USB cable, a USB Bluetooth dongle, and the NXT brick. It also includes NXT-G, a graphical programming environment that enables the creation and downloading of programs to the NXT. There is in development of a new robotics kit, called WeDo. It is designed for students from 7 to 11 year old and works with the OLPC, Intel Classmate, Mac OS and Microsoft Windows.
The NXT is the "brain" of a Mindstorms robot. This computer-controlled Lego brick lets the robot autonomously perform different operations.

