Corporate title
Publicly and privately held for-profit corporations confer corporate titles or business titles on company officials as a means of identifying their function in the organization. In addition, many non-profit organizations, educational institutions, partnerships, and sole proprietorships also confer corporate titles. The following is a list of common titles for corporate executives.

Note that there are considerable variations in the responsibilities of the titles.
Some companies have a Chairman and CEO, while the number two is the President and COO; other companies have a President and CEO but no official deputy.
Corporate titles are sometimes given more for prestige than out of any differentiation in job function. For example, at CIBC and BMO Financial Group, the position of Chief Operating Officer (COO) was created solely to facilitate the transition, as a means of grooming the future CEO before the current CEO retired. The division head (perhaps Executive Vice President or CEO of a division) is promoted to COO and takes over day-to-day and strategic planning, while the outgoing CEO is relegated to advisory duties. Once the new CEO formally takes power, the COO position is not replaced.
Executive Vice President is most frequently used to refer to a division head, however this position can also be known as Vice Chairman, or even President and CEO of the division, depending upon corporation structure, especially in the latter case when it is operated as a wholly-owned subsidiary instead of an internal division.

Other corporate employee classifications include:
Most modern corporations also have non-employee workers. These are usually 'temps' (temporary workers) or consultants who, depending on the project and their experience, might be brought on to lead a task for which the skill-set did not exist within the company, or in the case of a temp, in the vernacular sense, to perform busy-work or an otherwise low-skilled repetitive task for which an employee is deemed too valuable to perform. Non-employees generally are employed by outside agencies or firms, but perform their duties within a corporation or similar entity. They do not have the same benefits as employees of that company, such as pay-grades, health insurance, or sick days. Some high-skilled consultants, however, may garner some benefits such as a bonus, sick leave, or food and travel expenses, since they usually charge a high flat-fee for their services, or otherwise garner high hourly wages. An example of high-skilled consultants include lawyers and accountants who may not be employed by a corporation, but have their own firms or practices. Most temps, however, are compensated strictly for the hours they work, and are generally non-exempt.

