Rosalind Franklin
Rosalind Elsie Franklin (25 July 1920 Notting Hill, London – 16 April 1958 Chelsea, London) was an English biophysicist and X-ray crystallographer who made important contributions to the understanding of the fine molecular structures of DNA, viruses, coal and graphite. Franklin is still best known for her work on the X-ray diffraction images of DNA. Her data, according to Francis Crick, were “the data we actually used” [1] to formulate Crick and Watson's 1953 hypothesis regarding the structure of DNA.[2] However, when her work was published third, in the series of three DNA Nature articles, it appeared to only represent evidence in support of their hypothesis.[3] The possibility of Franklin having played a major role was not revealed until Watson wrote his personal account, The Double Helix,[4] which subsequently inspired several people to investigate DNA history and Franklin’s contribution. The first, Robert Olby’s "The Path to the Double Helix," supplied information about original source materials for those that followed.[5] After finishing her portion of the DNA work, Franklin led pioneering work on the tobacco mosaic and polio viruses. She died aged 37 of complications arising from ovarian cancer.

Franklin was born in Notting Hill, London[6] into an affluent and influential British-Jewish family.[7] Her father was Ellis Arthur Franklin (1894-1964), a London merchant banker and her mother was Muriel Frances Waley (1894-1976); she was the elder daughter and second of the family of five children.
Her uncle was Herbert Samuel (later Viscount Samuel) who was Home Secretary in 1916 and the first practicing Jew to serve in the British Cabinet.[8] He was also the first High Commissioner (effectively governor) for the British Mandate of Palestine.
Her aunt Helen Carolin Franklin was married to Norman de Mattos Bentwich, who was Attorney General in the British Mandate of Palestine.[9] She was active in trade union organisation and women's suffrage, and was later a member of the London County Council.[10][11]
Franklin was educated at St Paul's Girls' School[12][13] where she excelled in science, Latin[14] and sport.[15] Her family were actively involved with a Working Men's College, where Ellis Franklin, her father, taught electricity, magnetism and the history of the Great War in the evenings and later became vice principal.[16][17] Later Franklin's family helped settle Jewish refugees from Europe who had escaped the Nazis.[11]
In the summer of 1938 Franklin went to Newnham College, Cambridge. She passed her finals in 1941, but was only awarded a degree titular, as women were not entitled to degrees (BA Cantab.) from Cambridge at the time; in 1945 Franklin received her PhD from Cambridge University.

Franklin worked for Ronald Norrish between 1941 and 1942. Because of her desire to contribute to the World War II effort, she worked at the British Coal Utilisation Research Association in Kingston-upon-Thames from August 1942, studying the porosity of coal. Her work helped spark the idea of high-strength carbon fibres and was the basis of her 1945 doctoral thesis - "The physical chemistry of solid organic colloids with special reference to coal and related materials." [18][19]

After the war ended Franklin accepted an offer to work in Paris with Jacques Mering.[20] She learned x-ray diffraction techniques on coal and related inorganic materials during her three years at the Laboratoire central des services chimiques de l'État,[21]but she never fully trained as a crystallographer working on organic chemicals. This later proved to be a problem for her DNA work. Franklin seemed to have been very happy there[22] and earned an international reputation based on her published research on the structure of coal.[23] In 1950 she sought work in England[24] and in June 1950 she was appointed to a position at King's College London.[25]

In January 1951, Franklin started working as a research associate at King's College London in the Medical Research Council's (MRC) Biophysics Unit, directed by John Randall.[26] Although originally she was to have worked on x-ray diffraction of proteins and lipids in solution, Randall redirected her work to DNA fibers before she started working at King's since Franklin was to be the only experienced experimental diffraction researcher at King’s in 1951.[27][28] He made this reassignment, even before she started working at King's, because of the following pioneering work by Maurice Wilkins and Raymond Gosling.[29] Even using crude equipment these two men had obtained an outstanding diffraction picture of DNA which sparked further interest in this molecule. Wilkins and Gosling had been carrying out x-ray diffraction analysis of DNA in the Unit since May 1950, but Randall had not informed them of his having asked Franklin to take over both the DNA diffraction work and guidance of Gosling’s thesis.[30] Randall’s lack of communication about this reassignment significantly contributed to the well documented friction that developed between Wilkins and Franklin.[31] Franklin, working with her student Raymond Gosling,[32] started to apply her expertise in x-ray diffraction techniques to the structure of DNA. She used a new fine focus X-ray tube and microcamera ordered by Wilkins, but which she refined, adjusted and focused carefully. Drawing upon her physical chemistry background, Franklin also skillfully manipulated the critical hydration of her specimens.[33] When Wilkins inquired about this improved technique, Franklin replied in terms which offended Wilkins as Franklin having “an air of cool superiority.” [34]Franklin’s habit of intensely looking people in the eye while being concise, impatient and directly confrontational to the point of abrasiveness unnerved many of her colleagues. In stark contrast, Wilkins was very shy, and slowly calculating in speech while he avoided looking anyone directly in the eye. [35] In spite of the intense atmosphere, Franklin and Gosling discovered that there were two forms of DNA: at high humidity (when wet) the DNA fiber became long and thin, when it was dried it became short and fat.[36][37] These were termed DNA 'B' and 'A' respectively. Because of the intense personality conflict developing between Franklin and Wilkins, Randall [38] divided the work on DNA. Franklin chose the data rich A form while Wilkins selected the 'B' form[39][40] because his preliminary pictures had hinted it might be helical. He showed tremendous insight in this assessment of preliminary data. The x-ray diffraction pictures taken by Franklin at this time have been called, by J. D. Bernal, "amongst the most beautiful x-ray photographs of any substance ever taken".[36]
By the end of 1951 it was generally accepted in King's that the B form of DNA was a helix, but Franklin became unconvinced that the A form of DNA was helical in structure[41]after she had recorded an asymmetrical image in 1952 May. As a practical joke on Wilkins (who frequently expressed his view that DNA was helical), Franklin and Gosling produced a death notice regretting the 'death' of helical crystalline DNA (A-DNA).[42] During 1952 Rosalind Franklin and Raymond Gosling worked at applying the Patterson function to the x-ray pictures of DNA they had produced.[43] This was a long and labour-intensive approach but would yield significant insight into the structure of the molecule.[44][45]
By 1953 January, Franklin had reconciled her conflicting data and had started to write a series of three draft manuscripts, two of which included a double helical DNA backbone (see below). Her two A form manuscripts reached Acta Crystallographica in Copenhagen on 6 March 1953,[46] one day before Crick and Watson had completed their model.[47] Franklin had to have mailed them while the Cambridge team was building their model, and certainly had written them before she knew of their work. On 8 July, 1953 she modified one of these “in proof,” Acta articles “in light of recent work” by the King’s and Cambridge research teams.[48] The third draft paper on the ‘B’ form of DNA, dated 17 January 1953, was discovered years later amongst her papers, by Franklin’s Birkbeck colleague, Aaron Klug. He then published an evaluation of the draft’s close correlation with the third of the original trio of 25 April 1953 Nature DNA articles.[49]Klug designed this paper to complement the first article he had written defending Franklin’s significant contribution to DNA structure.[50]. He had written this first article in response to the incomplete picture of Franklin’s work depicted in Watson’s 1968 memoir, The Double Helix. As vividly described in The Double Helix, on 30 January 1953, Watson traveled to King’s carrying a preprint of Linus Pauling’s incorrect proposal for DNA structure. Since Wilkins was not in his office, Watson went to Franklin’s lab with his urgent message that they should all collaborate before Pauling discovered his error. The unimpressed Franklin became angry when Watson suggested she did not know how to interpret her own data. Watson hastily retreated, backing into Wilkins who had been attracted by the commotion. Wilkin commiserated with his harried friend and then changed the course of DNA history with the following disclosure. Watson was shown (by Wilkins) Franklin's famous photograph 51, which had been given to Wilkins by Gosling. Watson, in turn, showed Wilkins a pre-publication manuscript by Pauling and Corey.[51] Franklin and Gosling’s photo 51 gave the Cambridge pair critical insights into the DNA structure, whereas Pauling and Corey’s paper described a molecule remarkably like their first incorrect model.
In February 1953 Francis Crick and James D. Watson of the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge University had started to build a model of the B form of DNA using similar data to that available to both teams at King's. Much of their data were derived directly from research done at King's by Wilkins and Franklin, with Franklin’s being the most unique and critical data completed by February 1953.[52] Model building had been applied successfully in the elucidation of the structure of the alpha helix by Linus Pauling in 1951,[39][53] but Franklin was opposed to prematurely building theoretical models,until sufficient data was obtained to properly guide the model building. She took the view that building a model was only to be undertaken after enough of the structure was known.[41][54]Ever cautious she wanted to eliminate misleading possibilities. Photographs of her Birkbeck work table [55]show that she routinely used small molecular models, although certainly not ones on the grand scale successfully used at Cambridge for DNA. In the middle of February 1953, Crick's thesis advisor, Max Perutz gave Crick a copy of a report written for a Medical Research Council biophysics committee visit to King's in December 1952, containing many of Franklin's crystallographic calculations. Since Franklin had decided to transfer to Birkbeck College and Randall had insisted that all DNA work must stay at King’s, Wilkins was given copies of Franklin’s diffraction photographs by Gosling. By 28 February 1953 Watson and Crick felt they had solved the problem enough for Crick to proclaim (in the local pub) that they had “found the secret of life.”[56] However they knew they must complete their model before they could be certain.[57]
Watson and Crick finished building their model on 7 March 1953, one day before they received a letter from Wilkins stating that Franklin was finally leaving and they could put “all hands to the pump.”[58] This was also one day after Franklin’s two A form papers had reached Acta Crystallogrphica. Wilkins came to see the model the following week, according to Maddox on 12 March, and allegedly informed Gosling on his return to King’s.[59]It is uncertain how long it took for Gosling to inform Franklin at Birkbeck, but her original 17 March B form manuscript does not reflect any knowledge of the Cambridge model. Franklin did modify this draft later before publishing it as the third in the trio of 25 April 1953 Nature articles. On 18 March,[60], in response to receiving a copy of their preliminary manuscript, Wilkins penned the following “I think you’re a couple of old rogues, but you may well have something.” [61]
Crick and Watson then published their model in Nature on 25 April 1953 in an article describing the double-helical structure of DNA with only a footnote acknowledging “having been stimulated by a general knowledge of” Franklin and Wilkin's ‘unpublished’ contribution.[62] Actually, although it was the bare minimum, they had just enough specific knowledge of Franklin and Gosling's data upon which to base their model. As a result of a deal struck by the two laboratory directors, articles by Wilkins and Franklin, which included their x-ray diffraction data, were modified and then published second and third in the same issue of Nature, seemingly only in supported of the Crick and Watson theoretical paper which proposed a model for the B form of DNA.[63][64] Franklin left King's College London in March 1953 to move to Birkbeck College in a move that had been planned for some time.[43]
Weeks later, on 10 April, Franklin wrote to Crick for permission to see their model.[65] Franklin retained her scepticism for premature model building even after seeing the Crick-Watson model, and remained unimpressed. She is reported to have commented, "It's very pretty, but how are they going to prove it?" As an experimental scientist Franklin seems to have been interested in producing far greater evidence before publishing-as-proven a proposed model. As such her response to the Crick-Watson model was in keeping with her cautious approach to science.[66]However, as documented above, she did not hesitate to publish preliminary ideas about DNA in ACTA, even before they could be definitively proven. Most of the scientific community hesitated several years before accepting the double helix proposal. At first mainly geneticists embraced the model because of its obvious genetic implications. Broader acceptance for the DNA double helix did not start until about 1960, and was not openly acknowledged until 1961 during the 1962 Nobel prize nominations. It took Wilkins and his colleagues approximately seven years to collect enough data to prove and refine the proposed DNA structure. According to the 1961 Crick-Monod letter cited above, this experimental proof, along with Wilkins having initiated the DNA diffraction work, were the reasons why Crick felt that Wilkins should be included in the DNA Nobel prize.

Franklin's work in Birkbeck involved the use of x-ray crystallography to study the structure of the tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) under J. D. Bernal[67] and was funded by the Agricultural Research Council (ARC).[68] In 1954 Franklin began a longstanding and successful collaboration with Aaron Klug.[69] In 1955 Franklin had a paper published in the journal Nature, indicating that TMV virus particles were all of the same length,[70] this was in direct contradiction to the ideas of the eminent virologist Norman Pirie, though her observation ultimately proved correct.[71]
Franklin worked on various viruses with different people. She eventually divided the work with her focusing on rod like viruses such as TMV (tobacco mosaic virus) with her PhD student Kenneth Holmes, while Aaron Klug worked on spherical viruses with his student John Finch, with Franklin coordinating and overseeing the work.[72] Franklin also had a research assistant, James Watt, subsidised by the National Coal Board and was now the Leader of the "ARC group at Birkbeck.[73] By the end of 1955 her team had completed a model of the TMV, to be exhibited at the upcoming Brussels World’s fair. The Birkbeck team members were working on viruses affecting several plants, including potato, turnip, tomato and pea.[74] Franklin and Don Caspar produced a paper each in Nature that taken together demonstrated that the RNA in TMV is wound along the inner surface of the hollow virus.
