StarCraft professional competition
The computer game StarCraft has an active professional competition circuit, particularly in South Korea. The two major game channels in South Korea, Ongamenet and MBCGame, each run a Starleague, viewed by millions of fans. Starting in about 2002, pro-gamers started to become organized into teams, sponsored by large South Korean companies like Samsung, SK Telecom and KTF. StarCraft is also the most popular computer game competition during the annual World Cyber Games thanks to its Korean fanbase, and it is overall one of the world's largest computer and video game competitions in terms of prize money, global coverage and participants.[1][2]

KeSPA[3] stands for Korean e-Sports Players Association and publishes a monthly calculation of rankings based on a point scale. It is a rolling system based on the past six months of performance in both major and minor events, awarding points based on wins. The most weight is placed on recent games, while games farther back have less emphasis.
KeSPA rankings as of May 2009:

The Korean professional scene is currently divided into 12 teams, 11 of which are sponsored by corporations, and the other by the Korean Air Force.





All listed from oldest to most recent. Note that many of the Starleagues are named after the corporate sponsor for that year and that the other finalists are given in descending order of their finish. P/T/Z after a player's name indicates whether they played Protoss, Terran or Zerg respectively. The players are from South Korea except when noted.




2003:
2004 SKY:
2005 SKY:
2006 SKY:
2007 Shinhan Bank:
2008 Shinhan Bank: (There is no Season1 or 2.)

Winners of the KBK:
Winners of the OGN King Of Kings tournament:
Winners of the MBC Winner's Championship:
Winners of the KT-KTF Premiere League:
Winners of BlizzCon:
Winner of the CKCG (China-Korea Cyber Games)
Winner of the Snickers All-Star league:
Winners of WEF (World e-sports Festival):
Winners of Blizzard Worldwide Invitational:
Winner of IEF (International e-sports Festival):
Winner of the Shinhan Masters tournament:
Winner of GOM Star Invitational:
Winner of GOM Averatec-Intel Classic:
Winner of GOM Averatec-Intel Classic Special Match:

