The Umbrella Academy
The Umbrella Academy is a comic book written by Gerard Way with art by Gabriel Bá, cover art by James Jean, colors by Dave Stewart and letters by Blambot's Nate Piekos. The six-issue limited series[5] is released by Dark Horse Comics, the first issue making its premiere on September 19, 2007.[1] It won the 2008 Eisner Award for Best Finite Series/Limited Series. A second series The Umbrella Academy: Dallas followed in 2008. The series has been optioned for a film adaptation planned for release in 2012.

The members of the Umbrella Academy, a disbanded group of superheroes, reunite after the death of their adoptive father, "Sir Reginald Hargreeves". Hargreeves, an alien disguised as a famous entrepreneur, collected the members of the Umbrella Academy shortly after their birth and trained them to save the world from an unspecified threat. After his death, the members carry on his plan to save the world.

Way has stated that the biggest influence on this piece of work is his favorite writer, Grant Morrison of Doom Patrol. He has also stated that Pat McEown of ZombieWorld: Champion of the Worm was a big influence on his work. Way has said that Edvin Biuković is his all-time favorite artist and that "his Grendel Tales are like my bible to draw from".[4]


The six part series, Apocalypse Suite, began with the release of the first issue on September 19, 2007. One issue is to be released on the third Wednesday of every month for six months.[1] The series editor is Scott Allie, and the series assistant editors are Rachel Edidin and Sierra Hahn. The series designer is Tony Ong.

The first issue, “The Day the Eiffel Tower Went Berserk”, was released on September 19, 2007. The inside front cover features notes made by Sir Reginald Hargreeves on his seven adopted children, numbered by usefulness.

After a brief background is given on The Umbrella Academy, the plot jumps ten years ahead and tells of an event when The Umbrella Academy (aged ten) saved Paris, resulting in The Eiffel Tower flying into space. The story then jumps ahead another 20 years and sets the scene for future issues. Spaceboy is on the moon when he receives a call that The Monocle is dead. Vanya (00.07) receives a mysterious phone call telling her to audition for the chair of a violin player. When Spaceboy arrives at the mansion he encounters 00.05, who has has returned from the future. He states that "there is worse to come".
There are also pages of information; inside the front cover is a featured list of the members of The Umbrella Academy, from the "personal notes of Sir Reginal Hargreeves". On the last page of the story (back to back with the letters page) is an excerpt from the Encyclopedia Umbrellica, offering more details and background information on their exploits in Paris

The second issue, “We Only See Each Other At Weddings And Funerals”, was released on October 17, 2007.

Issue 2 starts the day after Issue 1. Spaceboy is told The Rumor is at the mansion and they greet each other at The Horror's statue. It is revealed he is dead but the cause is unknown, at which point Seance arrives. At a carnival in the city robots cause destruction because of the apparent reformation of The Umbrella Academy. The Future then describes what happened when he left and how he returned. The Kraken turns up and has a small confrontation with Spaceboy. The funeral attracts media attention. The Monocle's wife arrives at the funeral, and says a few words about the Monocle before her cloak is ripped off by The Kraken. She is revealed to be a talking mannequin of sorts, possibly a creation of Hargreeves' to serve as a mother figure to the children. The Kraken then argues with Spaceboy. Meanwhile, in response to the phone call she received last issue, Vanya (00.07) arrives at the Icarus Theatre where she is told to play her violin by a figure obscured by a blinding light. When the light goes off she is in front of many spectators and a skeleton in a suit who calls himself 'The Conductor' of 'The Orchestra Verdammten'. He claims that his new composition, 'The Apocalypse Suite', could destroy the world if played accurately. After hearing the plan, Vanya leaves but The Conductor anticipates her return. At the mansion Spaceboy and The Kraken have a violent conflict. Spaceboy has his laser up to The Kraken but they are broken up by the Rumor and 00.05 when he reveals that the world ended a mere three days after Hargreeve's death. After a moment, the group of heroes realize that the carnival is on fire - Spaceboy reveals that the culprits are the Terminauts, created by the malicious Dr. Terminal (a villain from their past) that were to activate if the Umbrella Academy were ever to reform. The Kraken jumps into the water, and Spaceboy orders everyone to the Televator. The Umbrella Academy has been reformed. The issue ends with a quote from the Monocle at his acceptance speech at the National Thallium Awards.

The third issue, “Dr. Terminal's Answer”, was released on November 21, 2007.

Issue three begins with a flashback from the Rumor, where she's caught in a daze remembering a childhood moment, being held captive by Dr. Terminal. She's snapped back to reality by Spaceboy, and she fades back to the current situation—a burning carnival. The Terminaunts which had activated last issue have been wreaking havoc upon a children's fair, and Space, Rumor, and Seance are fighting to rescue the children. Meanwhile, number 00.05 is being tested by Doctor Pogo, watching the news on a television. Suggesting to begin searching for clues on how close the Apocalypse may be, he leaves Pogo and his "mother" and takes off. Vanya makes it to the fair and is nearly slain by by a Terminaunt missile. She is saved by the Kraken, who took that opportunity to yell at her, to "get lost," because she had left them once already. There is implication that the Terminaunts are destroyed, and the super-team agree that this is only a minor scratch compared to what is coming, ending the adventure. In the Icarus Theater, however, Vanya enters glumly and requests to join the Orchestra Verdammten.
The book is finished with a small table of amusement park injuries, followed by the weekly Letters to the Editor section.

The fourth issue, “Baby, I'll Be Your Frankenstein”, was released on December 19, 2007.

The fourth issue begins with a flashback to eighteen years ago. Vanya runs through the Academy, shouting about how she hates everyone around her. She is consoled by Dr. Pogo and, when she states that there's nothing special about her, Pogo tells her that she is indeed special because, unlike her siblings, she doesn't need to destroy in order to be herself. We then jump to the present, where Vanya is being forcefully experimented on by The Conductor of the Orchestra Verdammten. The Conductor reveals that he killed several people to get copies of Hargreeves' secret notes, one of which indicates that Vanya is the most dangerous member of the Umbrella Academy. The Conductor states that while the orchestra is powerful, they need one pure soul to lead them all. Vanya says she will kill him, but before she can move, The Conductor flips a switch and begins Vanya's transformation. We transition to Number 00.05 and Dr. Pogo, who are flying around the city looking for signs of the apocalypse. As they survey the depravity around them, they discuss whether or not the earth is truly worth saving. Back at the Icarus Theatre, Vanya wakes up, now transformed into a pure white creature. At the Academy, The Kraken appears in the parlor (to the surprise of his siblings) and initiates a family fight over who their father loved the most before leaving the group. With The Kraken gone, the rest of the Academy decide to go out and patrol to make sure the city is still safe. Elsewhere, 00.05 and Pogo enjoy coffee at a diner until three men in red and black gas masks enter looking for 00.05. Again back at Icarus, the Conductor reveals Vanya, now dubbed 'La Viole Blanche' (The White Violin). Her entire body is now pure white and the design of a violin runs down her torso. She picks up her violin and plays a single note, ripping the Conductor in half and killing him instantly. She now stands in front of the group, triumphant, and declares that tonight they will kill the Umbrella Academy and tomorrow they will end the world.
The book ends with a riddle: Two bodies have I, though both joined in one. The stiller I stand, the faster I run. The answer is 'an hourglass'.

The fifth issue, "Thank You For The Coffee" was released on January 21, 2008.

In this fifth installment, the story begins with Inspector Lupo investigating a crime scene where shortly before mysterious masked characters come looking for 00.05. Agnes, a waitress at the diner where it occurred, describes how 00.05 killed every last masked character (whose identity we are yet to find out) before stating that 00.05 last words to her were- "thank you for the coffee." References to the beverage are frequent throughout the novel.
The story then continues with 00.05 searching through Hargreeves room at the Umbrella Academy, looking for a gun to finish himself when the end of the world arrives, but comes instead across Hargreeves Monocle, which when worn, shows the wearer who someone really is. In this case 00.05 looks at Dr Pogo and sees how he was mistreated in the lab, before collapsing and passing out.
Elsewhere, the Rumor and Spaceboy are standing on a building in the city, drinking coffee. They briefly discuss Rumor's daughter, Claire, after which point Spaceboy inquires whether or not the Rumor has lost her powers.
After this the White Violin pays a visit to the Umbrella Academy, promptly destroying the glass windows and the statue of the Horror in the grounds. She also continues to kill Dr Pogo.
The Rumor, Spaceboy and the Séance then turn up to the carnage, and the plot ends with a newspaper being delivered showing the same report that was displayed on the day the world ended. The headline reads "Perfect Day- Nothing bad to report". In the image where 00.05 is transported to the post-apocalypse future, a newspaper is shown with the same headline.

The sixth issue, "Finale" Or "Brothers And Sisters, I Am An Atomic Bomb" was released on February 20, 2008.

Following the death of Pogo, the Umbrella Academy sets out to foil The White Violin's plans to end the world. Seance is sent to an unknown location via the Televator, while the team rushes to the Icarus Theatre. Kraken tries to kill Vanya but fails due to past emotions. Rumor tries to influence Vanya and suffers a slashed throat. Spaceboy takes Rumor to a nearby hospital.
The orchestra continues playing, and Vanya claims that there's no use fighting, since the world's going to end anyway. Just then, the Seance arrives, along with Igor Stravinsky, the Manchester Children's Orchestra, and a few members of the Ube tribe. Seance seems to be channeling The Monocle's spirit, and tells Vanya that he plans to counter her apocalyptic song with Stravinsky's 'Rite of Spring'. The Kraken tries to tell Vanya not to listen to the Monocle because others love her when he didn't, but she turns on him angrily. Number Five shoots Vanya in the head, though she survives. The act is then dropped, and the Kraken is surprised to find that it is not the Monocle at all, but the Séance displaying his acting talents. The apocalypse rolls on and a meteor (one of many) hits the theatre, but using his powers of telekinesis, the Séance stops it from killing anyone.
In the epilogue, Number Five recounts the events following the night before. The meteors had shaken loose from the moon. The Rumor and Vanya both live, but neither will be able to use their talents anymore. Their old home is mostly demolished, the Eiffel Tower had crash-landed on top of it. The story then ends with Spaceboy and Kraken reconciling, and after resolving to rebuild, Spaceboy decides to make a sandwich. The group's mother-figure sits in the background. On the table sits a milk carton that reads "MISSING" with the Boy's face beneath.

A second series called The Umbrella Academy: Dallas, began publication on November 26, 2008.

The first issue, "The Jungle" was released on November 26, 2008.
Plot
The next chapter in the adventures of the Umbrella Academy opens with a flashback to seventeen years ago. The Monocle converses with the President on something that only the Academy can solve. Meanwhile the Lincoln Memorial attacks The Umbrella Academy in Washington DC, but is beaten when the Rumor summons a statue of John Wilkes Booth with a lie. The Booth statue kills the Lincoln statue and The Horror believes they will be rewarded with ice cream. Rumor tells him to grow up. We then jump foreword to after the events of the Apocalypse Suite. Vanya has lost all of her memory and is in the hospital and Allison brings her into a TV center where she can see everything she has done. The Seance has become famous and thinks he is special. Also Luther has seemed to stop caring and just lazes around watching T.V. and eating cookies.The Kraken wants to find the people who were witnesses at the coffee shop when 00.05 is attacked by the masked men and breaks a mans arm for not giving him any information. Allison has lost her voice and writes on a sheet of paper what she has to say, and seems to truly hate Vanya for all she has done, especially for killing Pogo. After losing a bet at a dog track Number 5 gets attacked in a parking lot by a legion of the masked men, who he calls the Temps Aeternalis. He quickly kills all of them after refusing to come with them to 'finish the job.' Things go down the drain when a agent who survived the slaughter contacts his superiors and calls for back-up in the form of 'Hazel and Cha-Cha.' In a panic 00.05 kills the man and proclaims in shock, "We're already dead."

The second issue, "Boy Scout" was released on December 24, 2008.
Plot
The second chapter of Dallas starts out with two unknown figures, revealed quickly to be the aforementioned Hazel and Cha-Cha, at the same coffee shop from volume 1 eating pie. The duo ask for the recipe of the pie that they seem to be infatuated with, but the cook won't tell them. He explains "I wouldn't even tell if you cut off my arms and legs," the two then proceed to do so in short order. The Kraken returns to the police station looking at photos of the massacre from the last issue but Lupo and the monkey, Body, runs into him in Lupo's office and they asked,"Where's The Boy?" but The Kraken had no clue so he just crawled out the window. They ask why he is crawling out the window instead out the front door. The Kraken stated,"Because cops give me the creeps.(Check your sources)" The Kraken returns home and gets into a fight with the now obese Spaceboy saying that they can't find No.5 and Spaceboy is just lazing around. Alison discovers the Monocle's monocle and quickly finds finds No. 5, who is being sung a birthday song by a chimp in drag and apparently believing himself to be the president. Seance ends up by Pogo's grave saying that he misses him and he hears something. He thinks it is Pogo talking to him and hears shocking secrets of No.5 from the monkey's spirit. Hazel and Cha-Cha then appear and smack Seance across the head with a baseball bat and then apologize from a fight they had in the issue beginning. The two proclaim that now with Seance in their hands they can find No.5, The Boy.

The third issue, "Television" or "Are You There, God? It's Me, Klaus" was released on January 28, 2009.
Plot
The chapter starts with the Seance inside of a television left on by the obese Spaceboy, who is asleep on the couch, and the Seance is trying to tell Spaceboy about what happened to him (being captured and how he will kill him). The television then breaks and Spaceboy wakes up. The Seance was communicating with Spaceboy through the television and Hazel and Cha-Cha found out, breaking the television. Cha-Cha then, after some words about the Seance's shoes and powers are exchanged by the three, puts a gun to the Seance's head. The Seance tries to pay his way out of his situation with money or "hooker amputees," but Haz
