Dirac equation
In physics, the Dirac equation is a relativistic quantum mechanical wave equation formulated by British physicist Paul Dirac in 1928 and provides a description of elementary spin-½ particles, such as electrons, consistent with both the principles of quantum mechanics and the theory of special relativity. The equation demands the existence of antiparticles and actually predated their experimental discovery, making the discovery of the positron, the antiparticle of the electron, one of the greatest triumphs of modern theoretical physics.

The Dirac equation in the form originally proposed by Dirac is:
The new elements in this equation are the 4×4 matrices  and , and the four-component wavefunction . The matrices are all Hermitian and have squares equal to the identity matrix:
and they all mutually anticommute: {αi,αj} = 0 and {αi,β} = 0. Explicitly,
where i and j are distinct and range from 1 to 3. These matrices, and the form of the wavefunction, have a deep mathematical significance. The algebraic structure represented by the Dirac matrices had been created some 50 years earlier by the English mathematician W. K. Clifford, which in turn had been based on the mid-19th century work of the German mathematician Hermann Grassmann in his "Lineare Ausdehnungslehre" (Theory of Linear Extensions). The latter had been regarded as well-nigh incomprehensible by most of his contemporaries. The appearance of something so seemingly abstract, at such a late date, in such a direct physical manner, amounts to one of the most remarkable chapters in the history of physics.

The Dirac equation is superficially similar to the Schrödinger equation for a free particle:
The left side represents the square of the momentum operator divided by twice the mass, which is the nonrelativistic kinetic energy. If one wants to get a relativistic generalization of this equation, then the space and time derivatives must enter symmetrically, as they do in the relativistic Maxwell equations—the derivatives must be of the same order in space and time. In relativity, the momentum and the energy are the space and time parts of a geometrical space-time vector, the 4-momentum, and they are related by the relativistically invariant relation
which says that the length of this vector is the rest mass m. Replacing E and p by  and  as Schrödinger theory requires, we get a relativistic equation:
and the wave function  is a relativistic scalar, it is a complex number which has the same numerical value in all frames. Because the equation is second order in the time derivative, one must specify both the initial value of  and not just . This is normal for classical waves where the initial conditions are the position and velocity. However, in quantum mechanics, the wavefunction is supposed to be the complete description; just knowing the wavefunction should determine the future.
In the Schrödinger theory, the probability density is given by the positive definite expression
and its current by
and the conservation of probability density has a local form:
In a relativistic theory, the form of the probability density and the current must form a four vector, so the form of the probability density can be found from the current just by replacing  by :
Everything is relativistic now, but the probability density is not positive definite, because the initial values of both  and  can be freely chosen. This expression reduces to Schrödinger's density and current for superpositions of positive frequency waves whose wavelength is long compared to the compton wavelength, that is, for nonrelativistic motions. It reduces to a negative definite quantity for superpositions of negative frequency waves only. It mixes up both signs when forces which have an appreciable amplitude to produce relativistic motions are involved, at which point scattering can produce particles and antiparticles.
Although it was not a successful description of a single particle, this equation is resurrected in quantum field theory, where it is known as the Klein–Gordon equation, and describes a relativistic spin-0 complex field. The non-positive probability density and current are the charge-density and current, while the particles are described by a mode-expansion.
In order to give the Klein–Gordon equation an interpretation as an equation for the probability amplitude for a single particle to have a given position, the negative frequency solutions need to be interpreted as describing the particle travelling backwards in time, so that they propagate into the past. The equation with this interpretation does not predict the future from the present except in the nonrelativistic limit, rather it places a global constraint on the amplitudes. This can be used to construct a perturbation expansion with particles zipping backwards and forwards in time, the Feynman diagrams, but it does not allow a straightforward wavefunction description, since each particle has its own separate proper time.

What is needed, then, is an equation that is first-order in both space and time. One could formally take the relativistic expression for the energy , replace p by its operator equivalent, expand the square root in an infinite series of derivative operators, set up an eigenvalue problem, then solve the equation formally by iterations. Most physicists had little faith in such a process, even if it were technically possible.
As the story goes, Dirac was staring into the fireplace at Cambridge, pondering this problem, when he hit upon the idea of taking the square root of the wave operator thus:
On multiplying out the right side, we see that in order to get all the cross-terms such as  to vanish, we must assume
with
Dirac, who had just then been intensely involved with working out the foundations of Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, immediately understood that these conditions could be met if A, B... are matrices, with the implication that the wave function has multiple components. This immediately explained the appearance of two-component wave functions in Pauli's phenomenological theory of spin, something that up until then had been regarded as mysterious, even to Pauli himself. However, one needs at least 4×4 matrices to set up a system with the properties desired—so the wave function had four components, not two, as in the Pauli theory.
Given the factorization in terms of these matrices, one can now write down immediately an equation
with  to be determined. Applying again the matrix operator on either side yields
On taking  we find that all the components of the wave function individually satisfy the relativistic energy–momentum relation. Thus the sought-for equation that is first-order in both space and time is
With  and , we get the Dirac equation.

The necessity of introducing half-integral spin goes back experimentally to the results of the Stern–Gerlach experiment. A beam of atoms is run through a strong inhomogeneous magnetic field, which then splits into N parts depending on the intrinsic angular momentum of the atoms. It was found that for silver atoms, the beam was split in two—the ground state therefore could not be integral, because even if the intrinsic angular momentum of the atoms were as small as possible, 1, the beam would be split into 3 parts, corresponding to atoms with Lz = −1, 0, and +1. The conclusion is that silver atoms have net intrinsic angular momentum of 1⁄2. Pauli set up a theory which explained this splitting by introducing a two-component wave function and a corresponding correction term in the Hamiltonian, representing a semi-classical coupling of this wave function to an applied magnetic field, as so:
Here Aμ is the applied electromagnetic field, and the three sigmas are Pauli matrices. e is the charge of the particle, e.g. e = − e0 for the electron. On squaring out the first term, a residual interaction with the magnetic field is found, along with the usual Hamiltonian of a charged particle interacting with an applied field:
This Hamiltonian is now a 2 × 2 matrix, so the Schrödinger equation based on it,
must use a two-component wave function. Pauli had introduced the sigma matrices
as pure phenomenology—Dirac now had a theoretical argument that implied that spin was somehow the consequence of the marriage of quantum theory to relativity.
The Pauli matrices share the same properties as the Dirac matrices—they are all Hermitian, square to 1, and anticommute. This allows one to immediately find a representation of the Dirac matrices in terms of the Pauli matrices:
The Dirac equation now may be written as an equation coupling two-component spinors:
Notice that on the diagonal we find the rest energy of the particle. If we set the momentum to zero—that is, bring the particle to rest—then we have
The equations for the individual two-spinors are now decoupled, and we see that the "top" and "bottom" two-spinors are individually eigenfunctions of the energy with eigenvalues equal to plus and minus the rest energy, respectively. The appearance of this negative energy eigenvalue is completely consistent with relativity.
It should be strongly emphasized that this separation in the rest frame is not an invariant statement—the "bottom" two-spinor does not represent antimatter as such in general. The entire four-component spinor represents an irreducible whole—in general, states will have an admixture of positive and negative energy components. If we couple the Dirac equation to an electromagnetic field, as in the Pauli theory, then the positive and negative energy parts will be mixed together, even if they are originally decoupled. Dirac's main problem was to find a consistent interpretation of this mixing. As we shall see below, it brings a new phenomenon into physics—matter/antimatter creation and annihilation.

The explicitly covariant form of the Dirac equation is (employing the Einstein summation convention):
In the above,  are the Dirac matrices.  is Hermitian, and the  are anti-Hermitian, with the definition
This may be summarized using the Minkowski metric on spacetime in the form
where the bracket expression  means , the anticommutator. These are the defining relations of a Clifford algebra over a pseudo-orthogonal 4-d space with metric signature ( + − − − ). Note that one may also employ the metric form ( − + + + ) by multiplying all the gammas by a factor of i. At an elementary level, the choice may be regarded as conventional, but there are specific reasons[clarification needed] for preferring the former, both mathematically and for convenience in calculation and physical interpretation. In the literature, one almost always finds the convention ( + − − − ) in use. The specific Clifford algebra employed in the Dirac equation is known as the Dirac algebra.
The Dirac equation may be interpreted as an eigenvalue expression, where the rest mass is proportional to an eigenvalue of the 4-momentum operator, the proportion being the speed of light in vacuo:
In practice, physicists often use units of measure such that  and c are equal to 1, known as "natural" units. The equation then takes the simple form
or, if Feynman slash notation is employed,
A fundamental theorem states that if two distinct sets of matrices are given that both satisfy the Clifford relations, then they are connected to each other by a similarity transformation:
If in addition the matrices are all unitary, as are the Dirac set, then S itself is unitary;
The transformation U is unique up to a multiplicative factor of absolute value 1. Let us now imagine a Lorentz transformation to have been performed on the derivative operators, which form a covariant vector. In order that the operator  remain invariant, the gammas must transform among themselves as a contravariant vector with respect to their spacetime index. These new gammas will themselves satisfy the Clifford relations, because of the orthogonality of the Lorentz transformat
