9/11 conspiracy theories
A variety of conspiracy theories question the mainstream account of the September 11 attacks in the United States. These theories assert that the official report on the events is not sufficiently forthright, thorough or truthful. Many critics allege that individuals in the government of the United States knew of the impending attacks and intentionally failed to act on that knowledge.[1] Some critics state that the attacks could have been a false flag operation carried out by a private network of high-level officials in the U.S. Government. The common suspected motives were the use of the attacks as a pretext to justify overseas wars, to facilitate increased military spending, and to restrict domestic civil liberties.
Many of the theories have been voiced by members of the 9/11 Truth Movement,[2] a name adopted by some organizations and individuals who question the mainstream account of the attacks. Some 9/11 Truth Movement members question the accuracy of the mainstream account of the attacks, and they are committed to further investigation. Others claim that the collapse of the World Trade Center was the result of a controlled demolition and/or that United Airlines Flight 93 was shot down.[3] Some also contend that a commercial airliner did not crash into the Pentagon; this position is debated within the Truth Movement, many of whom believe that AA Flight 77 did crash there, but that it was allowed to do so via an effective stand down of the military.[4]
Published reports by the U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology rejected the controlled demolition hypothesis.[5][6] The community of civil engineers generally accepts the mainstream account that the impacts of jet aircraft at high speeds in combination with subsequent fires, rather than controlled demolition, led to the collapse of the Twin Towers.[7]

Since the September 11 attacks, a number of theories challenging the mainstream account of the attacks have been put forward in websites, books, and films. Many groups and individuals challenging the mainstream account identify as part of the 9/11 Truth Movement.[8]
In an address to the United Nations on November 10, 2001, United States President George W. Bush denounced the emergence of "outrageous conspiracy theories†... that attempt to shift the blame away from the terrorists, themselves, away from the guilty."[9] Later, as media exposure of conspiracy theories of the events of 9/11 increased, U.S. Government agencies and the Bush Administration issued responses to the theories, including a formal analysis by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) about the collapse of the World Trade Center,[10] a revised 2006 State Department webpage to debunk the theories,[11] and a strategy paper referred to by President Bush in an August 2006 speech, which declared that terrorism springs from "subcultures of conspiracy and misinformation," and that "terrorists recruit more effectively from populations whose information about the world is contaminated by falsehoods and corrupted by conspiracy theories. The distortions keep alive grievances and filter out facts that would challenge popular prejudices and self-serving propaganda."[12] Al-Qaeda has repeatedly claimed responsibility for the attacks, with chief deputy Ayman al-Zawahiri accusing Shia Iran and Hezbullah of intentionally starting rumors that Israel carried out the attacks to denigrate Sunni successes in hurting America.[13]
A number of 9/11 opinion polls have been conducted in an attempt to establish roughly how many people have doubts about the mainstream account, and how prevalent some of the theories are. By November 2008 there were around 150,000,000 web pages dedicated to 9/11 conspiracy theories.[14]Just prior to the fifth anniversary of the attacks, mainstream news outlets released a flurry of articles on the growth of 9/11 conspiracy theories,[15] with Time Magazine stating, "This is not a fringe phenomenon. It is a mainstream political reality."[16] In 2008 9/11 conspiracy theories topped a "greatest conspiracy theory‚Äù list compiled by The Daily Telegraph. The list was based on following and traction.[17][18] An August 2007 Zogby poll found that, while 26.4% of Americans believe that "certain elements in the U.S. Government knew the attacks were coming but consciously let them proceed for various political, military and economic reasons", another 4.8% of them believe that "certain U.S. Government elements actively planned or assisted some aspects of the attacks".[19] Mainstream coverage generally presents these theories as a cultural phenomenon and is often critical of their content.

Immediately following the September 11 attacks, the U.S. Government stated that nineteen terrorists hijacked four commercial airplanes by using knives, box cutters, pepper spray, a gun on at least one flight (United Airlines Flight 93), and explosives; it is likely, though, that the gun and bombs were fakes.[20] At 8:46 a.m. and 9:03 a.m., Flights 11 and 175 crashed into the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center, causing them to collapse soon after. 7 World Trade Center collapsed later in the day from fires started by debris from the collapse of the North Tower. Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon at 9:37 a.m. and Flight 93 crashed in an open field in Pennsylvania at 10:03 a.m. after the passengers stormed the cockpit. U.S. Government intelligence sources identified the hijackers and linked them to the terrorist organization al-Qaeda, headed by Osama bin Laden, which later claimed sole responsibility for the attacks.
The terms 'mainstream account,' 'official account' and 'official conspiracy theory' all refer to:
The 9/11 Commission Report disclosed prior warnings of varying detail of planned attacks against the United States by al-Qaeda. The report said that the government ignored these warnings due to a lack of communication between various law enforcement and intelligence personnel. For the lack of inter-agency communication, the report cited bureaucratic inertia and laws passed in the 1970s to prevent abuses that caused scandals during that era. The report faulted the Clinton and the Bush administration with ‚Äúfailure of imagination‚Äù. Most members of the Democratic and the Republican parties applauded the commission's work.[32]
Some members of the 9/11 Commission have criticized how the government formed and operated the commission, and allege omissions and distortions in the 9/11 Commission Report.[33][34][35] Commission co-chairs Thomas Kean and Lee Hamilton wrote in their book "Without Precedent" that the 9/11 Commission was "set up to fail," and in an interview with CBC News, Mr. Hamilton complained of "poor access" and said that the Commission was unable to answer many of its questions about FAA and NORAD and White House activity. [36] He also acknowledged that NORAD had told the Commission things that were not true. [37] According to an article in Harpers, the Commissioners wrote that they threatened to seek prosecution of officials for criminal obstruction. [38]

Most 9/11 conspiracy theories generally originate from dissatisfaction with the mainstream account of 9/11.[39] The mildest forms allege that official reports have covered up incompetence or negligence from U.S. personnel, or involvement of a foreign government or organization other than al-Qaeda.[40] The most prevalent theories can be broadly divided into two main forms:


The issue of whether anyone outside al-Qaeda was aware that the attacks were going to take place has been a subject of some theories. Among the theories are: whether activities at the World Trade Center in the days prior to 9/11 were consistent with preparation for a controlled demolition; whether the Bush Administration or military knew about the plan of using planes as missiles; what the intelligence agencies knew about al-Qaeda activities inside the United States; whether the put options placed on United Airlines and American Airlines, and other trades considered questionable by theorists, indicate foreknowledge; whether there were warnings from foreign countries that were specific enough to have warranted action; whether there was any intelligence information gathered about imminent al-Qaeda attacks and whether it was specific enough to have warranted action; whether the alleged hijackers were under surveillance prior to the attacks and, if so, to what extent; and whether agents of the Mossad or the Pakistani Inter-Services Intelligence were aware that the attacks were going to take place.
It has been claimed that action or inaction by U.S. officials with foreknowledge was intended to ensure that the attacks took place successfully. For example, Michael Meacher, former British environment minister and member of Tony Blair's Cabinet until June 2003, was widely criticized for claiming that America knowingly failed to prevent the attacks.[42][43]

Many 9/11 theories claiming government involvement allege that the U.S. air defense system, NORAD, was deliberately stood down or rendered ineffective. This claim originates from the 9/11 Commission Report account of the actions taken by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), NORAD and other military personnel. Some note that "FAA standard procedures for NORAD interception of off course or ceased responding aircraft"[44] were activated on 129 occasions in the year 2000 and on 67 occasions in the period from September 2000 to June 2001 but failed to do so on 9/11.[45]
The interception failure was due to a change in protocol. Prior to 9/11 standard procedure was for the FAA to contact NORAD who then immediately scrambled fighters to intercept non responding craft. In July 2001 the procedure was changed. The FAA now had to contact the Pentagon‚Äôs National Military Command Center and the United States Secretary of Defense would then have to approve the use of military aircraft for the intercept. The Pentagon would then contact the relevant NORAD Air Defense Sector. On 9/11 the new protocol broke down. The FAA could not get a response from the Pentagon until 8:34, some 21 minutes after the first hijack and were then told they needed to call the Northeast Air Defense Sector (NEADS) themselves.[46] Air traffic controller Joseph Cooper then contacted NORAD directly. As the operator should not have received that call he then passed it on to his superior. Protocol broke down again and NORAD scrambled without the secretary of defense's authorisation.[47]
Although the military first learned of the hijacking of Flight 11 from Boston Center at 8:40, just 6†minutes before its impact, it was able to scramble two F-15 fighter jets from the 102nd Fighter Wing from Otis Air National Guard Base just 12†minutes later at 8:52, six minutes after Flight 11 crashed into the North Tower of the World Trade Center. However, the 33†minute flight time didn't allow them to reach Manhattan until 9:25, 22†minutes after the crash of Flight 175 into the South Tower.[48] One of the pilots later commented, "As we're climbing out, we go supersonic on the way, which is kind of nonstandard for us. And, Nasty even called me on the radio and said, Duff, you're super. I said yeah, I know. You know, don't worry about it. ... I just wanted to get there quickly."[49]
The 9/11 Commission Report timeline of events in the FAA and NORAD contradicts the timeline released by NORAD shortly after the event. The Washington Post reported in its August 3, 2006 edition that:
"For more than two years after the attacks, officials with NORAD and the FAA provided inaccurate information about the response to the hijackings in testimony and media appearances... Some staff members and commissioners of the Sept. 11 panel concluded that the Pentagon's initial account of how it reacted to the 2001 terrorist attacks may have been part of a deliberate effort to mislead the commission and the public... Suspicion of wrongdoing ran so deep that the 10-member commission, in a secret meeting at the end of its tenure in summer 2004, debated referring the matter to the Justice Department for criminal investigation. In the end, the panel agreed to a compromise, turning over the allegations to the inspectors general for the Defense and Transportation departments, who can make criminal referrals if they believe they are warranted".[50]
Since the 9/11 Commission places the primary blame on communication failures within the FAA, David Ray Griffin, who has written several books alleging that the 9/11 conspiracy was considerably larger than the government claims, has questioned why the U.S. Military would lie to cover up the mistakes made by that agency.[51]
There were a number of war games and military exercises taking place during the attacks, including Northern Vigilance, a NORAD operation which involved deploying fighter aircraft to locations in Alaska and northern Canada to respond to a war game being conducted by Russia; Global Guardian, an annual command-level exercise organized by United States Strategic Command in cooperation with Space Command and NORAD; and Vigilant Guardian, a semiannual NORAD Command Post Exercise (CPX) (meaning it is conducted in offices and with computers, but without actual planes in the air) involving all NORAD command levels in which one scenario being run on September 11 was a simulated hijacking. Additionally, a National Reconnaissance Office drill was being conducted on September 11 in which the event of a small aircraft crashing into one of the towers of the agency's headquarters, was to be simulated, and the Office of Emergency Management were preparing for Operation Tripod, a bioterrorism exercise due to take place on September 12.
Members of the 9/11 Truth Movement question whether the story that such an array of war games and exercises were due to take place on that day by coincidence, is plausible. United States Representative Cynthia McKinney, former head of the Strategic Defense Initiative; Dr. Robert M. Bowman; economist Michel Chossudovsky; publisher/editor Michael Ruppert of From the Wilderness and many others have suggested that the war games were deliberately planned to coincide with the attacks to create confusion.[52] Webster Tarpley, in his book 9/11 Synthetic Terror: Made in USA claims that the war games were the "perfect cover for conducting the actual live-fly components of 9/11 through a largely un-witting military bureaucracy. Under the cover of this confusion, the most palpably subversive actions could be made to appear in the harmless and even beneficial guise of a drill."[53]
In testimony before the 9/11 Commission, Secretary of Transportation Norman Mineta said that he was not present when the order was given to shoot down the airplanes. He stated that he became aware of the order when he entered the Presidential Emergency Operation Command in the bunker underneath the White House where Dick Cheney was in command. He describes the following exchange, between Cheney and a "young man", as taking place sometime between him entering the bunker and the time the Pentagon was hit at 9:37.
There was a young man who had come in and said to the vice president, "The plane is 50†miles out. The plane is 30†miles out." And when it got down to, "The plane is 10†miles out," the young man also said to the vice president, "Do the orders still stand?" And the vice president turned and whipped his neck around and said, "Of course the orders still stand. Have you heard anything to the contrary?"[54]
However, the 9/11 Commission report concluded, based on testimony from the other members who were in the bunker and overhead the conversation, that the young man was referring to Flight 93, and that the young aide first entered and stated that the aircraft was 80 miles out "at some time between 10:10 and 10:15", after Flight 93 had crashed, but was believed to still be on its way toward Washington, D.C.[55] Mineta did not know at the time what the orders referred to, and he learned only later that 'shoot down orders' had been given that day. However, it has been suggested that the orders spoken of could have been an order not to shoot down the approaching plane. This theory is based on an interpretation of the young man's question as an expression of his surprise about the order. Therefore, because shooting down the approaching plane would be the accepted action, the unusual nature of an order not to shoot down the plane would explain the young man's putative disbelief. Still others believe that the young aide's repeated questioning was due to ethical concerns over shooting down a commercial aircraft with innocent civilians on board.[56][57]

The controlled demolition hypothesis states that the collapse of the North Tower, South Tower and WT7 was due to the use of explosives. It plays a central role in the 9/11 conspiracy theories that assert that the U.S. Government is responsible for the attacks.[58] Dr. Steven E. Jones, formerly of BYU, suggests that the official working hypothesis, as outlined in NIST's 2004 interim report, that fire and debris induced the collapse of WTC 7
