Isolation tank
An isolation tank is a lightless, soundproof tank in which subjects float in salinated water at skin temperature. They were first used by John C. Lilly in 1954 in order to test the effects of sensory deprivation. Such tanks are now also used for meditation and relaxation and in alternative medicine. Isolation tanks were originally called sensory deprivation tanks. Other synonyms for isolation tank include float tank, floating tank, floater tank, flotation tank, REST tank, flotation baths, John Lilly tank and sensory attenuation tank.

John C. Lilly, a medical practitioner and neuro-psychiatrist, developed the flotation tank in the 1950s. During his training in psychoanalysis at the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), Lilly commenced experiments with sensory deprivation. In neurophysiology, there had been an open question as to what keeps the brain going and the origin of its energy sources. One answer was that the energy sources are biological and internal and do not depend upon the outside environment. It was argued that if all stimuli is cut off to the brain then the brain would go to sleep. Lilly decided to test this hypothesis and, with this in mind, created an environment which totally isolated an individual from external stimulation. From here, he studied the origin of consciousness and its relation to the brain.
Peter Suedfeld and Roderick Borrie of the University of British Columbia began experimenting on the therapeutic benefits of flotation tank usage in the late 1970s. They named their technique "Restricted Environmental Stimulation Therapy" (REST).

In the original tanks, people were required to wear complicated head-masks in order to breathe underwater, however, the mask detracted from the isolation experience. The tight fit of the mask seal around the face and the retention strips wrapping around the back of the head were uncomfortable in long sessions. The constant hissing of the air valves and bubbling of exhaust air out of the mask prevented the possibility of silence. The faceplate of the mask was typically solid black for visual isolation, but then the tank user needed help entering and leaving the isolation tank since the mask blinded them.
In newer tanks, epsom salt is added to the water in the tank to raise the density of the water above the density of the human body, so that the subject floats with his or her face above the water. However, since the ears are submerged when the subject is in a relaxed position, hearing is greatly reduced, particularly when ear-plugs are also used. When the arms float to the side, skin sensation is greatly reduced because the air and water are the same temperature as the skin, and the feeling of a body boundary fades. The sense of smell is also greatly reduced, especially if the water has not been treated with chlorine.
The growing number of commercial float tanks has brought increased regulation of disinfection. For example different states in the US have applied different rules. In Europe the DIN 19643 bathing water standard requires automated chlorination from REDOX (ORP) measurement. Chlorine, bromine and peroxide disinfection have all been used successfully. There is doubt about Ozone safety because of the closed air space.
Generally users of isolation tanks enter the pool nude. Although a swimsuit may be worn, the elastic material of a tight-fitting suit can create uncomfortable compressed stress points on the skin during the session. Due to the high epsom salt content the water is minimally changed and all users are expected to shower, soap up, and rinse clean prior to entering the tank to extend the water life as long as possible. Bathing is again needed after a session to remove excess epsom salt from the skin.
Most isolation tanks use a circulating surface skimmer, cartridge filtration, and disinfection means, including ultraviolet sterilization and chemicals to keep the water free of microbes and sediment, though this is turned off during a session to keep the isolation space as quiet as possible. A ring heating system can be used around the outer walls of the tank to warm the water so that it rises up the outside edges of the pool, travels towards the center, and then sinks under the tank user. This very slow water convection flow helps to keep the user centered in the middle of the pool, without them floating to the side and bumping into the walls of the small tank during long float sessions.
Isolation tank construction and plumbing is typically all-plastic. Exposed metal cannot be used because the strong salt solution will rapidly corrode and damage any metal surfaces. Unsealed stone and concrete surfaces can also be damaged by dissolved epsom salt splashed or dripped outside the tank, due to the dried salt recrystallizing and opening up cracks and fissures.
It is useful to have a shower stall in the same room as the tank. Before a session, the tank user can transfer directly from the shower to the tank without drying off. Following the session, they can immediately rinse off which minimizes the dripping of corrosive salt through the building.
Having plumbing facilities immediately next to the tank is also helpful when the water must eventually be changed to prevent microbe growth. The plumbing, including the drain pipes, should be constructed of plastic to prevent deterioration from the salt. The salt concentration may need to be diluted when discarded, to prevent damage to small private wastewater plumbing systems.

A therapeutic session in a flotation tank typically lasts an hour. For the first forty minutes, it is reportedly possible to experience itching in various parts of the body (a phenomenon also reported to be common during the early stages of meditation). The last twenty minutes often end with a transition from beta or alpha brainwaves to theta, which typically occurs briefly before sleep and again at waking. In a float tank, the theta state can last for several minutes without the subject losing consciousness. Many use the extended theta state as a tool for enhanced creativity and problem-solving or for superlearning. The more often the tank is used the longer the theta period becomes.[citation needed]
Spas sometimes provide commercial float tanks for use in relaxation. Flotation therapy has been academically studied in the USA and in Sweden with published results showing reduction of both pain and stress.[1] The relaxed state also involves lowered blood pressure and maximal blood flow.
Floating can be passive or active, depending on the purpose. For relaxation, one simply floats and becomes the observer of the body/mind system. Active floating has many different techniques. One may perform meditation, mantras, self-hypnosis, utilize educational programs, etc. The idea of active floating is that, when the body is relaxed, the mind becomes highly suggestible and any action taken during these states will enter the information into the sub-conscious. Flotation therapy may be used to complement other body work and healing methods.
Commercial centres have begun to use couple floating in larger float tanks or rooms. This helps some people overcome reluctance to try a new experience. Whilst less satisfactory than solo floating, all of the benefits are the same.
More extreme uses of the tank involve the subject taking varying doses of hallucinogens; such as LSD, psilocybin mushrooms, or cannabis and spending prolonged periods in the tank (up to tens of hours) at a time, an approach pioneered by Lilly himself—though he claims to have tried LSD in the tank only prior to 1964, when the psychedelic was still legal.

New research undertaken at the Human Performance Laboratory at Karlstad University by Swedish PhD, Sven-Ake Bood[2] concludes that regular floatation tank sessions can provide significant relief for chronic stress related ailments. Studies involving 140 people with long-term conditions such as anxiety, stress, depression and fibromyalgia found that more than three quarters experienced noticeable improvements.
Dr. Bood commented: "Through relaxing in floating tanks, people with long-term fibromyalgia, for instance, or depression and anxiety felt substantially better after only 12 treatments". Research targeted the effectiveness of floatation treatment with regard to stress related pain and anxiety over the period of seven weeks. 22 percent of the participants became entirely free of pain and 56 percent experienced clear improvement.
Broken down to various symptoms, the results were as follows: 23 percent slept better, 31 percent experienced reduced stress, 27 percent felt less agony and 24 percent became less depressed or got rid of their depression altogether. The research also confirms the findings of an earlier thesis that floatation, after only twelve sessions, substantially improves sleep patterns leaving users more optimistic and with reduced nervousness, tension and pain. Relaxing in a weightless state in the silent warmth of a flotation tank activates the body's own system for recuperation and healing, said Sven-Ake Bood. What researchers find particularly gratifying is that the positive effects were still in evidence 4 months after the floating treatment ended.

The physicist Richard Feynman's experiences in a sensory deprivation tank were documented in the popular book Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!. Feynman was invited to try the isolation tank at John Lilly's home after Lilly attended one of Feynman's popular lectures on quantum mechanics. Comedian Joe Rogan also owns an isolation tank and can be heard talking about his experiences with it in a YouTube video.[3] Another comedian, George Carlin used an isolation tank to "meditate or just drift off".[4]
Actor Nicolas Cage spent some time in an Isolation Tank to capture the claustrophobia of his character in the 2006 film World Trade Center. He played PAPD Sgt. John McLoughlin, who was trapped in the rubble of the WTC Towers during the attacks.

Isolation tanks have appeared in a number of novels, movies and television programs.




