Generalized anxiety disorder
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is an anxiety disorder that is characterized by excessive, uncontrollable and often irrational worry about everyday things that is disproportionate to the actual source of worry. This excessive worry often interferes with daily functioning, as individuals suffering GAD typically catastrophise, anticipate disaster, and are overly concerned about everyday matters such as health issues, money, death, family problems, friend problems or work difficulties.[1] They often exhibit a variety of physical symptoms, including fatigue, fidgeting, headaches, nausea, muscle tension, muscle aches, difficulty swallowing, trembling, twitching, irritability, sweating, insomnia, and hot flashes. These symptoms must be consistent and on-going, persisting at least 6 months, for a formal diagnosis of GAD to be introduced. [1] Approximately 6.8 million American adults experience GAD.[2]

According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual IV-Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR), the following criteria must be met for a person to be diagnosed with Generalized Anxiety Disorder.
Symptoms can also include nausea, vomiting, and chronic stomach aches.

The World Health Organization's Global Burden of Disease project did not include generalised anxiety disorders.[3] In lieu of global statistics, here are some prevalence rates from around the world:

The usual age of onset is variable - from childhood to late adulthood. Women are two to three times more likely to suffer from generalized anxiety disorder than men[6].

Some research suggests that GAD may run in families[7], and it may also grow worse during stress. GAD usually begins at an earlier age and symptoms may manifest themselves more slowly than in most other anxiety disorders[8]. Some people with GAD report onset in early adulthood, usually in response to a life stressor. Once GAD develops, it can be chronic, but can be managed, if not all-but-alleviated, with proper treatment.[9]

Approximately half of patients attending mental health services for conditions including anxiety disorders such as panic disorder or social phobia are the result of alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence. Sometimes anxiety pre-existed alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence but the alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence act to keep the anxiety disorders going and often progressively making them worse. Many people who are addicted to alcohol or prescribed benzodiazepines when it is explained to them they have a choice between ongoing ill mental health or quitting and recovering from their symptoms decide on quitting alcohol and or their benzodiazepines. It was noted that every individual has an individual sensitivity level to alcohol or sedative hypnotic drugs and what one person can tolerate without ill health another will suffer very ill health and that even moderate drinking can cause rebound anxiety syndromes and sleep disorders. A person who is suffering the toxic effects of alcohol or benzodiazepines will not benefit from other therapies or medications as they do not address the root cause of the symptoms. Recovery from benzodiazepines tends to take a lot longer than recovery from alcohol but people can regain their previous good health. Symptoms may temporarily worsen however, during alcohol withdrawal or benzodiazepine withdrawal.[10]

Common-sense action may be taken to reduce the general level of anxiety. The actions may be appropriate to a specific type of stress. For example, if there are frequent worries about financial difficulties, then financial planning may help. Other actions may improve general mental resilience. For example, exercise may help in releasing tension and, by improving fitness, enable the individual to manage tasks more easily and feel better about himself or herself.[11]

A meta-analysis of 35 studies[12]shows the psychological method of cognitive behavioral therapy to be more effective in the long term than pharmacologic treatment (drugs such as SSRIs), and while both treatments reduce anxiety, CBT is more effective in reducing depression.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a psychological method of treatment for GAD, which involves a therapist working with the patient to understand how thoughts and feelings influence behavior.[13] The goal of the therapy is to change negative thought patterns that lead to the patient's anxiety, replacing them with positive, more realistic ones. Elements of the therapy include exposure strategies to allow the patient to gradually confront their anxieties and feel more comfortable in anxiety-provoking situations, as well as to practise the skills they have learned. CBT can be used alone or in conjunction with medication.[14]
CBT usually helps one third of the patients substantially, whilst another third does not respond at all to treatment. [15]

Pharmaceutical treatments for GAD include selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),[14] which are antidepressants that influence brain chemistry to block the reabsorption of serotonin in the brain.[16] SSRIs are mainly indicated for clinical depression, but are also effective in treating anxiety disorders.[14] Common side effects include nausea, sexual dysfunction, headache, diarrhea, among others. Common SSRIs prescribed for GAD include:

Imipramine (Tofranil速) is a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA). TCAs are thought to act on serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine in the brain. Venlafaxine (Effexor速) is a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (SNRI). SNRIs, a class of drugs related to the SSRIs, alter the chemistries of both norepinephrine and serotonin in the brain. Buspirone (BuSpar速) is a serotonin receptor agonist belonging to the azaspirodecanedione class of compounds. Pregabalin (Lyrica速) acts on the voltage-dependent calcium channel in order to decrease the release of neurotransmitters such as glutamate, noradrenaline and substance P.

Benzodiazepines (or "benzos") are fast-acting sedatives that are also used to treat GAD and other anxiety disorders.[14] These are often given in the short-term due to their nature to become habit-forming and for tolerance to develop to their therapeutic effects.[17] Side effects include drowsiness, reduced motor coordination and problems with equilibrioception. Common benzodiazepines used to treat GAD include[14]:

Kava, a relaxant made from a root only of a relative of the black pepper plant, is effective at controlling anxiety - particularly when used as a short term fast acting drug in combination with CBT (see below)[citation needed]. The recommended use is for a support person such as the GAD sufferer's spouse to encourage a dose when anxiety strikes as the patient is often unwilling/unable to dose himself or herself. Kava is absorbed through most mucous membranes and takes effect in roughly the same time as alcohol. It is a symptomatic relief for anxiety and does not address the fundamental problem, but it does give the patient a reliable mental crutch to work through the core problems. It appears that the required dosage actually decreases with regular use, perhaps as a form of conditioning. Two major advantages of Kava supported therapy are the rapid response of the active ingredients (removing the need for titration) and the lack of withdrawal symptoms. There are no specific contraindications with other chemical treatments, but caution must be observed when the patient is already taking psychoactive drugs. Due to reports of serious liver damage related to the use of kava, many countries, particularly across Europe, have banned the sale of it. The risks and benefits of using kava, as with any drug, must be reviewed and proper caution must be exercised.

In the National Comorbidity Survey (2005), 58% of patients diagnosed with major depression were found to have an anxiety disorder; among these patients, the rate of comorbidity with GAD was 17.2%, and with panic disorder, 9.9%. Patients with a diagnosed anxiety disorder also had high rates of comorbid depression, including 22.4% of patients with social phobia, 9.4% with agoraphobia, and 2.3% with panic disorder. For many, the symptoms of both depression and anxiety are not severe enough (i.e. are subsyndromal) to justify a primary diagnosis of either major depressive disorder (MDD) or an anxiety disorder.
Patients can also be categorized as having mixed anxiety-depressive disorder, and they are at significantly increased risk of developing full-blown depression or anxiety. Appropriate treatment is necessary to alleviate symptoms and prevent the emergence of more serious disease.[citation needed]
Accumulating evidence indicates that patients with comorbid depression and anxiety tend to have greater illness severity and a lower treatment response than those with either disorder alone.[citation needed] In addition, social function and quality of life are more greatly impaired.
In addition to coexisting with depression, research shows that GAD often coexists with substance abuse or other conditions associated with stress, such as irritable bowel syndrome.[citation needed] Patients with physical symptoms such as insomnia or headaches should also tell their doctors about their feelings of worry and tension. This will help the patient's health care provider to recognize whether the person is suffering from GAD.


