Japanese tea ceremony
What is commonly known in English as the Japanese tea ceremony is called chanoyu (茶の湯, lit. "tea hot-water") or also chadō or sadō (茶道, "the way of tea") in Japanese. It is a multifaceted traditional activity in which powdered green tea, called matcha (抹茶), is ceremonially prepared and served to others. Zen Buddhism was integral to its development, and this influence pervades many aspects of it.
The get-togethers for chanoyu are called chakai (literally "tea meeting") or chaji (literally "tea function"). Usually the term chakai is used to refer to a relatively simple course of hospitality that includes the service of confections, usucha (thin tea), and perhaps tenshin (a light snack), while the term chaji refers to a more formal course of hospitality usually including a special kind of full-course meal called kaiseki (懐石 ?) or more specifically cha-kaiseki (茶懐石 ?), followed by confections, koicha (thick tea), and usucha (thin tea). A chaji may last up to four hours.

According to the Nihon Kōki (Latter Chronical of Japan), drinking of tea was introduced to Japan in the 9th century, by the Buddhist monk Eichū (永忠), who had returned to Japan from China. This is the first documented evidence of tea in Japan. The entry in the Nihon Kōki states that Eichū personally prepared and served "simmered tea" (煎茶, sencha) to Emperor Saga who was on an excursion in Karasaki (in present Shiga Prefecture) in the year 815. By imperial order in the year 816, tea plantations began to be cultivated in the Kinki region of Japan.[1] However, the interest in tea in Japan faded after this.[2]
In China, tea had already been known, according to legend, for more than a thousand years. The form of tea popular in China in the era when Eichū went for studies was "brick tea" (団茶 ,dancha?). The brick tea was made by steaming and pounding tea leaves, pressing this into molds, and drying this until hard. This then would be ground in a mortar, and the resulting ground tea decocted together with various other herbs and/or flavorings.[3]
The custom of drinking tea, first for medicinal, and then largely also for pleasurable reasons, was already widespread throughout China. In the early 9th century, Chinese author Lu Yu wrote the Chá jīng (茶經, the Classic of Tea), a treatise on tea focusing on its cultivation and preparation. Lu Yu's life had been heavily influenced by Buddhism, particularly the Zen-Chán school. His ideas would have a strong influence in the development of the Japanese tea ceremony.[4]
Around the end of the 12th century, the style of tea preparation called "tencha" (点茶), in which powdered tea was placed in a bowl, hot water poured into the bowl, and the tea and hot water whipped together, was introduced by Eisai, another Japanese monk returning from China. He also brought tea seeds back with him, which eventually produced tea that was of the most superb quality in all of Japan.[5]
This powdered green tea was first used in religious rituals in Buddhist monasteries. By the 13th century, when the Minamoto (see Kamakura Bakufu) gained control over the nation's government and the samurai warrior class ruled supreme, tea and the luxuries associated with it became a kind of status symbol among the warrior class, and there arose "tea competition" (tōcha）parties wherein contestants could win extravagant prizes for guessing the best quality tea -- that grown in Kyoto, deriving from the seeds which Eisai brought from China.
The next major period in Japanese history was the Muromachi Period, pointing to the rise of the cultural era known as Kitayama Bunka, centering around the elegant cultural world of Ashikaga Yoshimitsu and his villa in the northern hills of Kyoto. This period saw the budding of what is generally regarded as Japanese traditional culture as we know it today.
The tea ceremony developed as a "transformative practice," and began to evolve its own aesthetic, in particular that of wabi. Wabi, meaning quiet or sober refinement, or subdued taste, "is characterized by humility, restraint, simplicity, naturalism, profundity, imperfection, and asymmetry [emphasizing] simple, unadorned objects and architectural space, and [celebrating] the mellow beauty that time and care impart to materials."[6] Ikkyū, who revitalized Zen in the 15th century, had a profound influence on the tea ceremony.
By the 16th century, tea drinking had spread to all levels of society in Japan. Sen no Rikyu, perhaps the most well-known—and still revered—historical figure in tea ceremony, followed his master, Takeno Jōō's, concept of ichi-go ichi-e, a philosophy that each meeting should be treasured, for it can never be reproduced. His teachings perfected many newly developed forms in Japanese architecture and gardens, fine and applied arts, and the full development of chadō, "the "way of tea". The principles he set forward - harmony (和 ,wa?), respect (敬 ,kei?), purity (清 ,sei?), and tranquility (寂 ,jaku?) - are still central to tea ceremony.
Many schools of Japanese tea ceremony have evolved through the long history of chanoyu, and are active today.

Main article: chashitsu
Almost any place where the host's implements for the making and serving of the tea can be set out, and where the host can make the tea in the presence of the seated guest(s), can be used as a venue for a chakai. For instance, chakai can be held outdoors, in the open air. This is known as nodate (野点), "tea-making outdoors." On the other hand, a tatami-floored room with adjacent mizuya space for the host to conduct preparations of the various items to be used is required for a chaji.
Although rooms for teaching chanoyu are generally at least six tatami in floor space, which makes it possible for the students to practice the various group training exercises, tea rooms (chashitsu) that are designed specifically for use for the wabi style of chanoyu, as developed by Sen Rikyū, are usually small, a typical floor size being 4 1/2 tatami. The smallest tea room can be as little as one-and-a-half tatami in floor space. Large rooms in which chanoyu gatherings may be held are almost inevitably general reception rooms, which may loosely be referred to as chashitsu on the particular occasions when they are used for chanoyu. Building materials and decorations are deliberately simple and rustic in wabi style tea rooms.

Traditionally in chanoyu, the year is divided into two main seasons. One is the so-called ro (炉, "fireplace") season, constituting the cold part of the year in Japan. The other is the so-called furo (風炉, "brazier") season, constituting the warm part of the year in Japan.
In November, when the weather turns cold, the ro built into the floor of a tea room is opened, for use to heat the kettle for making the tea. Around May, when the weather turns warm, the ro is covered up and, in order to heat the kettle for making the tea, a furo is set in the tea room.

Chanoyu involves two forms of matcha preparation: koicha (濃茶, "thick tea") and usucha (薄茶, "thin tea"). The best quality tea leaves are used in producing the matcha for koicha. Historically, the tea leaves used as packing material for the koicha leaves in the tea jar (chatsubo) would be made into matcha (powdered tea) for making usucha. Japanese historical documents about chanoyu which differentiate between usucha as opposed to koicha first appear in the Tenmon era (1532-55).[7] The first documented appearance of the term koicha is in 1575.[8]
As the terms imply, koicha is a thick blend of powdered tea and hot water; usucha is made from less powdered tea in ratio to the amount of hot water for a serving. Using the tea whisk (chasen), usucha is whipped together with the hot water, while koicha requires a sort of 'kneading' method, to smoothly blend the plentiful amount of powdered tea with the relatively small amount of hot water for a serving.
Normally, one bowl of koicha is shared among several guests. This style of sharing a bowl of koicha first appears in historical documents in 1586, and is a method considered to have been invented by Sen no Rikyū.[9]
The chanoyu function called chaji centers around the preparation and drinking of koicha. At a chaji, the koicha is followed by the preparation and drinking of usucha. Oftentimes, chakai involve only the preparation and serving of usucha (and accompanying confections); this tea service representing the more relaxed, finishing portion of a chaji. If and when the venue for the event makes use of more than one room (space), it is not uncommon for one to be devoted to the preparation and drinking of koicha and the other(s) to usucha, and a tenshin snack to also be offered somewhere, as an 'abbreviated' form of meal which would otherwise be served at a chaji.

Tea equipment is called chadōgu (茶道具; literally "tea tools"). A wide range of chadōgu is necessary for even the most basic style of chanoyu. A full list of tea implements and supplies and their various styles and variations could fill a several-hundred-page book. The following are a few of the essential components:
All the tools for tea ceremony are handled with exquisite care. They are scrupulously cleaned before and after each use and before storing.

If the tea is to be served in an independent tea house, the guests will wait in a garden shelter until summoned by the host. They ritually purify themselves by washing their hands and rinsing their mouths with water from a small stone basin, and proceed through a simple garden along a roji, or "dewy path," to the tea house. Guests remove their shoes and enter the tea house through a small door, and proceed to the tokonoma scroll alcove, and are then seated seiza-style on the tatami in order of prestige.
The host may build the charcoal fire in the presence of the guests, to heat the water for making the tea. This is done in a prescribed manner.
Guests may be served a light, simple meal called a "tenshin", or a special kind of full-course meal called "kaiseki" or "chakaiseki". The full-course meal comes with sake, Japanese rice wine.[10] They will then return to the waiting shelter until summoned again by the host.
If no meal is served, the host will proceed directly to the serving of a small sweet or sweets. Sweets are eaten from special paper called kaishi, which each guest carries, often in a decorative wallet or tucked into the breast of the kimono.
Each utensil - including the tea bowl, whisk, and tea scoop - is then ritually cleaned in the presence of the guests in a precise order and using prescribed motions. The utensils are placed in an exact arrangement according to the particular style of tea-making procedure (temae) being performed. When the ritual cleaning and preparation of the utensils is complete, the host will place a measured amount of green tea powder in the bowl and add the appropriate amount of hot water, then whisk the tea using set movements. When the tea is ready, the host places it out and, depending on the circumstances, an assistant takes it to the guest or the guest comes after it.
Bows are exchanged between the host and guest of honour. The guest then bows to the second guest, and raises the bowl in a gesture of respect to the host. The guest rotates the bowl to avoid drinking from its front, takes a sip, and compliments the host on the tea. If it is thick tea (koicha), the guest then takes two more sips before wiping the rim, rotating the bowl to its original position, and passing it to the next guest with a bow. The procedure is repeated until all guests have taken tea from the same bowl, and the bowl is returned to the host. In some ceremonies, each guest will drink from an individual bowl, but the order of serving and drinking is the same. In the case of thin tea (usucha), the tea is inevitably prepared in individual servings.
If thick tea (koicha) has been served, the host will then prepare thin tea, or usucha, first bringing in a smoking set (tabakobon) and different kind of confections, referred to as higashi (干菓子, "dry confections"), to go with the thin tea. The tea is served in much the same manner as for koicha, but in a more relaxed atmosphere. For example, during the thick tea serving, guests are not expected to have conversation except a ceremonial one between the first guest and the master. In the thin tea serving, after a similar ritual conversation, the guests are expected to switch to more casual and occasional conversation and smoking occasion is offered.
Traditionally both thick and thin tea is expected to be served, except fuji no chakai or chakai in occasion, which is held only with usucha, for the convenience of the unexpected guest. Today it has been developed to ooyose chakai (chakai with many people) where only usucha with cake is served. Nowadays commonly only usucha is served in most of chakai.[citation needed]
After all the guests have taken tea, the host cleans the utensils in preparation for putting them away. The guest of honour will request that the host allow the guests to examine some of the utensils, and each guest in turn examines each item, including the tea caddy and the tea scoop. The items are treated with extreme care and reverence as they may be priceless, irreplaceable, handmade antiques, and guests often use a special brocaded cloth to handle them.
The host then collects the utensils, and the guests leave the tea house. The host bows from the door, and the ceremony is over. A tea ceremony can last up to four hours, depending on the type of ceremony performed, the number of guests, and the types of meal and tea served.

There are many styles of chanoyu, depending upon the occasion, season, and countless other possible factors. Note that the word temae, which indicates a formalized chanoyu procedure for conducting as the guests watch, can be written 点前 or 手前. At Urasenke, when it pertains to a procedure for laying the charcoal (sumi) to build the fire, it is written 手前; otherwise, it is written 点前.

Chabako temae (茶箱点前) is so called because the equipment is removed from and then replaced into a special box (chabako, literally tea box). Chabako developed as a convenient way to be prepared with the necessary equipment to make tea outdoors. There are various styles of chabako temae. The basic equipment contained in the chabako are the tea bowl, tea whisk in a special container, tea scoop, caddy containing the powdered tea, and linen wiping cloth in a special container, as well as a container for little candy-like sweets. Many of the items are smaller than usual, to fit in the box. This ceremony takes approximately 35-40 minutes.

Hakobi temae (運び点前). The name comes from the fact that, except for the hot water kettle (and brazier if a sunken hearth is not being used), the essential items for the tea-making, including even the fresh water container, are carried into the tea room by the host as a part of the temae. In other temae, the water jar and perhaps other items, depending upon the style of temae, are pre-placed in the tea room before the guests' entry.

Bon temae (Omotesenke, Mushanokojisenke: 盆手前, "tray ceremony"; Urasenke: 盆略点前 bonryaku temae), is a simple procedure for making usucha (thin tea). The tea bowl, tea whisk, tea scoop, chakin and natsume are on a tray, and the pot for the hot water conventionally is a spouted and handled iron pot called a tetsubin, heated on a portable hearth like a hibachi. This procedure originated in the Urasenke school. It is usually the first temae learned, and is the easiest to perform, requiring neither much specialized equipment nor a lot of time to complete. It may easily be done sitting at a table, or outdoors, using a thermos pot in place of the tetsubin and portable hearth.

In the ryūrei (立礼, literally standing bow) style, the tea is prepared at a special table. It is possible, therefore, for ryūrei style chanoyu to be conducted in non-tatami-floored rooms, and even outdoors. The name refers to the host's practice of performing the first and last bows standing. In ryūrei there is usually an assistant who sits near the host and moves the host's stool out of the way as needed for standing or sitting. The assistant also serves the tea and sweets to the guests.

Calligraphy, mainly in the form of hanging scrolls, plays a central role in the tea ceremony. Scrolls, often written by famous calligraphers or Buddhist monks, are hung in the tokonoma (scroll alcove) of the tea room. They are selected for their appropriateness for the season, time of day, or theme of the particular ceremony. Calligraphic scrolls may feature well-known sayings, particularly those associated with Buddhism, poems, descriptions of famous places, or words or phrases associated with tea ceremony. A typical example might have the characters wa kei sei jaku (和敬清寂, harmony, respect, purity and tranquility). Some contain only a single character; in summer, kaze (風)("wind") would be appropriate. Hanging scrolls that feature a painting instead of calligraphy, or a combination of both, may contain seasonally appropriate images, or images appropriate to the theme of the particular ceremony. Rabbits, for example, might be chosen for a nighttime ceremony because of their association with the moon. Scrolls are sometimes placed in the waiting room as well.

Chabana (茶花, literally "tea flowers") is the simple style of flower arrangement used in tea ceremony. Chabana has its roots in ikebana, an older style of Japanese flower arranging, which itself has roots in Shinto and Buddhism.
Chabana evolved from the 'free-form' style of ikebana called nageire ("thrown in" method), which was used by early tea masters. Chabana is said, depending upon the source, to have been either developed or championed by Sen no Rikyu. He is said to have taught that chabana should give the viewer the same impression that those flowers naturally would give if they were [still] growing outdoors, in nature.
Unnatural and/or out-of-season materials are never used. Also, props and devices such as frogs are not used. The containers in which chabana are arranged are referred to generically as hanaire (花入). Chabana arrangements typically comprise few items, and little or no "filler" material. In the summer, when many flowering grasses are in season in Japan, however, it is seasonally appropropriate to arrange a number of such 'flowering grasses' in an 'airy' basket-type container (籠花入; kago-hanaire). Unlike ikebana (which often uses shallow, wide dishes), tall, narrow hanaire are frequently used in chabana. The containers for the flowers used in chanoyu are typically made from natural materials such as bamboo, as well as metal or ceramic, but rarely glass.
Chabana arrangements are so simple that frequently no more than a single blossom is used; this blossom will invariably lean towards or face the guests.[11]

There are two ways to write the term kaiseki or kaiseki ryōri in kanji. Written 会席 or 会席料理, the term indicates a traditio
