Pink Floyd
Pink Floyd are an English rock band who initially earned recognition for their psychedelic and space rock music, and later, as they evolved, for their progressive rock music. Pink Floyd are known for philosophical lyrics, sonic experimentation, innovative album cover art, and elaborate live shows. One of rock music's most successful and influential acts, the group have sold over 210 million albums worldwide[1][2][3] including 74.5 million albums in the United States.[4] Pink Floyd influenced progressive rock artists of the 1970s such as Genesis and Yes,[5] as well as contemporary artists such as Nine Inch Nails,[6] and Dream Theater.[7]
Pink Floyd were formed in London in 1965 when Syd Barrett moved down from Cambridge and joined The Tea Set, a group consisting of Regent Street Polytechnic architecture students Nick Mason, Roger Waters, Richard Wright and Bob Klose.[8] The group had moderate mainstream success and were one of the most popular bands in the London underground music scene in the late 1960s as a psychedelic band led by Syd Barrett. However, Barrett's erratic behaviour eventually led his colleagues to replace him with guitarist and singer David Gilmour. After Barrett's departure, singer and bass player Roger Waters became a dominant force in the group, a situation which developed through the late 1970s, and lasted until his departure from the group in 1985. The band had always been popular in England, though they did not achieve worldwide critical and commercial success until the concept albums The Dark Side of the Moon (1973), Wish You Were Here (1975), and Animals (1977), and the rock opera The Wall (1979).
In 1985, Waters declared Pink Floyd "a spent force", but the remaining members, led by Gilmour, continued recording and touring under the name Pink Floyd. Waters sued them for the name and eventually they reached a settlement out of court, under which Gilmour, Mason and Wright would continue as Pink Floyd. They again enjoyed worldwide success with A Momentary Lapse of Reason (1987) and The Division Bell (1994). Waters performed with the band for the first time in 24 years on 2 July 2005 at the London Live 8 concert.


Roger Waters left Cambridge in 1962 to take architecture courses at the Regent Street Polytechnic in London. There he met his fellow student Nick Mason. In 1963 they both joined the existing group, Sigma 6.[9] Sigma 6 was also known as the Megadeaths (or Meggadeaths), Leonard's Lodgers, The Tea Set (or The T-Set), The Abdabs, and The Screaming Abdabs.[10] As The Tea Set, their personnel consisted of guitarists Rado "Bob" Klose and Roger Waters, drummer Nick Mason, and keyboardist and wind instrument player Richard Wright. After a brief stint with a lead vocalist named Chris Dennis,[8] blues and folk guitarist and vocalist Syd Barrett joined the band. Waters then moved to bass and Wright to full time keyboards.[11]
When The Tea Set found themselves on the same bill as another band with the same name, Barrett came up with the alternative name The Pink Floyd Sound, after two Piedmont blues musicians, Pink Anderson and Floyd Council, two names he'd seen on the notes of a Blind Boy Fuller album.[8][12] For a time after this they oscillated between The Tea Set and The Pink Floyd Sound, with the latter name eventually winning out. The Sound was dropped fairly quickly, but the definite article was still used regularly until 1970. The group's UK releases during the Syd Barrett era credited them as The Pink Floyd as did their first two U.S. singles. 1969's More and Ummagumma albums credit the band as Pink Floyd, produced by The Pink Floyd, while 1970's Atom Heart Mother credits the band as The Pink Floyd, produced by Pink Floyd. David Gilmour is known to have referred to the group as The Pink Floyd as late as 1984.[11]
In a 1967 interview with Tonarskvall 3 Radio in Sweden, when Roger Waters was asked about why they chose that particular name for the band Waters replied that 'It just sounds like a nice name. It's really just a registration mark. It's better than calling ourselves CCE338, or something like that'.[13]

The heavily jazz-oriented Klose left in 1965 after recording only a demo,[10] leaving a stable lineup: Barrett on guitar and lead vocals, Waters on bass guitar and backing vocals, Mason on drums and percussion, and Wright on keyboards and backing vocals. Barrett soon started writing his own songs, influenced by American and British psychedelic rock, with his own brand of whimsical humour. Pink Floyd became a favourite in the underground movement, playing at such prominent venues as the UFO club, the Marquee Club and the Roundhouse. Critics identified their musical style as art rock, a term which is now regarded as an early form of progressive rock; these two genres are often regarded as equivalent or interchangeable terms.[14]
At the end of 1966 the band were invited to contribute music for Peter Whitehead's film Tonite Let's All Make Love In London; they were filmed recording two tracks ("Interstellar Overdrive" and "Nick's Boogie") in January 1967. Although hardly any of this music made it onto the film, the session was eventually released as London '66-'67 in 2005. As their popularity increased, the band members formed Blackhill Enterprises in October 1966, a six-way business partnership with their managers, Peter Jenner and Andrew King,[11] issuing the singles "Arnold Layne" in March 1967 and "See Emily Play" in June 1967. "Arnold Layne" reached number 20 in the UK Singles Chart, and "See Emily Play" reached number 6,[11] granting the band its first national TV appearance on Top of the Pops in July 1967.
Released in August 1967, the band's debut album, The Piper at the Gates of Dawn, is today considered to be a prime example of British psychedelic music,[15] and was generally well-received by critics at the time. It is now viewed, by many critics, as one of the best debut albums.[16] The album's tracks, predominantly written by Barrett, showcase poetic lyrics and an eclectic mixture of music ranging from avant-garde free-form pieces such as "Interstellar Overdrive" to whimsical songs such as "The Scarecrow" (inspired by the folk music of The Fens, a rural region north of Barrett, Gilmour and Waters's home town of Cambridge). Lyrics were entirely surreal and often referred to folklore (for example, "The Gnome"). Produced by Norman Smith, the music reflected newer technologies in electronics through its prominent use of stereo panning, tape editing, echo effects (specifically, a Binson Echorec machine) and electric keyboards. The album was a hit in the UK where it peaked at #6, but did not do well in North America, reaching #131 in the U.S.,[17] and that only after it was reissued in the wake of the band's state side commercial breakthrough in the 1970s. During this period, the band toured with Jimi Hendrix, which helped to increase their popularity.

As the band became more popular, the stresses of life on the road, pressure by the record company to produce hit singles, and a significant intake of psychedelic drugs took their toll on Barrett, whose mental health had been deteriorating for several months.[18] In January 1968, guitarist David Gilmour joined the band to carry out Barrett's playing and singing duties, though Gilmour believes that Jeff Beck was considered as well.[19]
With Barrett's behaviour becoming less and less predictable, and his almost constant use of LSD, he became very unstable, occasionally staring into space while the rest of the band performed. During some performances, he would just strum one chord for the duration of a concert, or randomly begin de-tuning his guitar.[11] He was also equally erratic in rehearsals; on one occasion he was, according to band members, perfectly alert and ready to record while preparing, yet as soon as the recording began he would stare into space. When the recording was cut, he became, as Waters describes him, "the usual jack-the-lad, hopping around on the balls of his feet". The absent expression in his eyes inspired Waters' lyrics in 1975's "Shine On You Crazy Diamond", "Now there's a look in your eyes/ Like black holes in the sky". The band's live shows became increasingly ramshackle until, eventually, the other band members simply stopped taking him to the concerts.
The last concert featuring Barrett was on 20 January 1968 on Hastings Pier. It was originally hoped that Barrett would write for the band with Gilmour performing live, but Barrett's increasingly difficult compositions, such as "Have You Got It, Yet?", which changed melodies and chord progression with every take, eventually made the rest of the band give up on this arrangement.[11] Once Barrett's departure was formalised in April 1968, managers Jenner and King decided to remain with him, and the six-way Blackhill partnership was dissolved.[11] The band adopted Steve O'Rourke as manager, and he remained with Pink Floyd until his death in 2003.[20]
After recording two solo albums (The Madcap Laughs and Barrett) in 1970 (co-produced by and sometimes featuring Gilmour, Waters and Wright) to moderate success, Barrett went into seclusion. Again going by his given name, Roger, he eventually moved back to his native Cambridge and lived a quiet life there until his death on 7 July 2006.[21]

This period was one of musical experimentation for the band. Gilmour, Waters and Wright each contributed material that had its own voice and sound, giving this material less consistency than the Barrett-dominated early years or the more polished, collaborative sound of later years. As Barrett had been the lead singer during his era, Gilmour, Waters and Wright now split both songwriting and lead vocal duties. Waters mostly wrote low-key, jazzy melodies with dominant bass lines and complex, symbolic lyrics, Gilmour focused on guitar-driven blues jams, and Wright preferred melodic psychedelic keyboard-heavy numbers. Unlike Waters, Gilmour and Wright tended to write tracks that had simple lyrics or that were purely instrumental. Some of the band's most experimental music is from this period, such as "A Saucerful of Secrets" –consisting largely of noises, feedback, percussion, oscillators and tape loops– and "Careful with That Axe, Eugene" (which also went by a number of other names) –a bass- and keyboard-heavy jam culminating in crashing drums and Waters' primal screams.
Whilst Barrett had written the bulk of the first album, only one of his compositions, "Jugband Blues", appeared on the second Pink Floyd album, A Saucerful of Secrets. Barrett also played on the songs "Remember A Day" (recorded during the sessions for Piper) and "Set The Controls For The Heart Of The Sun". A Saucerful of Secrets was released in June 1968, reaching #9 in the UK and becoming the only Pink Floyd album not to chart in the U.S.[17] Somewhat uneven due to Barrett's departure, the album still contained much of his psychedelic sound combined with the more experimental music that would be fully showcased on Ummagumma. Its centrepiece, the 12-minute title track, hinted at the epic, lengthy songs to come, but the album was poorly received by critics at the time,[16] although critics today tend to be kinder to the album in the context of their body of work.[15] Future Pink Floyd albums would expand upon the idea of long, sprawling compositions, offering more focused songwriting with each subsequent release.
Pink Floyd were then recruited by director Barbet Schroeder to produce a soundtrack for his film, More, which was premièred in May 1969. The music was released as a Pink Floyd album in its own right, Soundtrack from the Film More, in July 1969. The album achieved another #9 finish in the UK, and peaked at #153 in the U.S.[17] Critics tended to find the collection of the film's music patchy and uneven.[15] The band would use this and future soundtrack recording sessions to produce work that may not have fit into the idea of what would appear on a proper Pink Floyd LP. Many of the tracks on More (as fans usually call it) were acoustic folk songs. Two of these songs, "Green Is the Colour" and "Cymbaline", became fixtures in the band's live sets for a time and were a part of their live The Man/The Journey suite, as can be heard in the many available bootleg recordings from this period. "Cymbaline" was also the first Pink Floyd song to deal explicitly with Roger Waters' cynical attitude toward the music industry. The rest of the album consisted of avant-garde incidental pieces from the score (some of which were also part of The Man And The Journey) with a few heavier rock songs thrown in, such as "The Nile Song".
The double album Ummagumma, was a mix of live recordings and unchecked studio experimentation by the band members, with each member recording half a side of a vinyl record as a solo project (Mason's first wife makes an uncredited contribution as a flautist).[11] Though the album was realised as solo outings and a live set, it was originally intended as a purely avant-garde mixture of sounds from "found" instruments. The subsequent difficulties in recording and lack of group organization led to the shelving of the project. The band was wildly experimental on the studio disc, which featured Waters' pure folk "Grantchester Meadows", an atonal and jarring piano piece ("Sysyphus"), meandering progressive rock textures ("The Narrow Way") and large percussion solos ("The Grand Vizier's Garden Party"). "Several Species of Small Furry Animals Gathered Together in a Cave and Grooving with a Pict" is a five-minute song composed entirely of Roger Water's voice played at varied speeds. Large portions of the studio disc were previously played in their live The Man/The Journey concept piece. The live disc featured acclaimed performances of some of their most popular psychedelic-era compositions and caused critics to receive the album more positively than the previous two albums.[15] The album was Pink Floyd's most popular release yet, hitting UK #5 and making the U.S. charts at #74.[17]
Atom Heart Mother (1970), the band's first recording with an orchestra, was a collaboration with avant-garde composer Ron Geesin. The name was a last minute decision by the band when they were inspired by a newspaper article about a woman with a pacemaker who had given birth. The cover was equally unplanned, with the photographer claiming to have "gone out into the countryside and [taken] a picture of the first thing he saw", which was a black and white cow standing in a green pasture. This met with the group's approval, as it fit with their wish to have "something plain" on the cover, as a contrast to the psychedelic cover art on their previous albums. One side of the album consisted of the title piece, a 23-minute long "rock-orchestral" suite. The second side featured one song from each of the band's then-current vocalists/songwriters (Roger Waters' folk-rock "If", David Gilmour's bluesy "Fat Old Sun" and Richard Wright's nostalgic "Summer '68"). Another lengthy piece, "Alan's Psychedelic Breakfast", was a sound collage of a man cooking and eating breakfast and his thoughts on the matter, linked with instrumentals. The man was Alan Stiles, one of Pink Floyd's roadies at the time. The use of noises, incidental sound effects and voice samples would thereafter be an important part of the band's sound. While Atom Heart Mother was considered a huge step back for the band at the time[22] and is still considered one of its most inaccessible albums,[15] it had the best chart performance for the band up to that time, reaching #1 in the UK and #55 in the U.S.[17] It has since been described by Gilmour as "a load of rubbish" and Waters has said he wouldn't mind if it were "thrown in the dustbin and never listened to by anyone ever again."[11] At the time, however, the popularity of the album allowed Pink Floyd to embark on their first full U.S. tour; with hindsight, the album was another transitional piece for the group, hinting at future musical territory such as "Echoes" in its ambitious title track.
Before releasing their next original album, the band released the compilation album Relics, which contained several early singles and B-sides, along with one original song (Waters' jazzy "Biding My Time", part of The Man/The Journey recorded during the Ummagumma sessions). They also contributed to the soundtrack of Zabriskie Point, though many of their contributions were eventually discarded by director Michelangelo Antonioni.

During this time, Pink Floyd shed their association with the "psychedelic" scene and became a distinctive band who were difficult to classify. The divergent styles of their primary songwriters, Gilmour, Waters and Wright, merged into a unique sound, which quickly became known among fans as the "Pink Floyd Sound". This era contains what many consider to be two of the band's masterpiece albums, The Dark Side of the Moon and Wish You Were Here.
The sound became polished and collaborative, with the philosophic lyrics and distinctive bass lines of Waters combining with the unique blues guitar style of Gilmour and Wright's haunting keyboard melodies, and harmonic textures. Gilmour was the dominant vocalist throughout this period, and female choirs and Dick Parry's saxophone contributions became a notable part of the band's style. The sometimes atonal and harsh sound exhibited in the band's earlier years gave way to a very smooth, mellow and soothing sound, and the band's epic, lengthy compositions reached their zenith with "Echoes". This period was not only the beginning but the end of the truly collaborative era of the band; after 1973 Waters' influence became more dominant musically as well as lyrically. Wright's last credited composition until 1992's La Carrera Panamericana and last lead vocal on a studio album until 1994's The Division Bell were in this period ("Shine On You Crazy Diamond" and "Time" respectively), while Gilmour's writing credits sharply declined in frequency until Waters left the band in 1985, though he continued to perform lead vocals and write songs throughout the whole time. The last ties with Barrett were severed in musical fashion with Wish You Were Here, whose epic track "Shine On You Crazy Diamond" was written as a tribute to Barrett. The epic, 26-minute piece was described by Gilmour as "Roger's paean to Syd".
The band's sound was considerably more focused on Meddle (1971), with the 23-minute epic "Echoes" taking up the second side of the LP. "Echoes" is a smooth progressive rock song with extended guitar and keyboard solos and a long segue in the middle consisting largely of synthesised music produced on guitars, organs, and synths, along with backward wah pedal guitar sounding like samples of sea gulls or albatross and an entire whale song playing over the top, described by Waters as a "sonic poem".[11] The song took a while to construct, and went through many named stages, including "Nothings", "Son of Nothings" and "Return of the Son of Nothings". The latter was performed at their free Hyde
