Peggle
Mac game requires OS:	Mac OS 10.3.9 and later Memory:	256 MB RAM Processor:	G4,G5 or Intel Core Duo Internet:	Internet connection is required to register both the download and CD-ROM versions of the game
Peggle is a Windows, Mac, Xbox 360, Nintendo DS, and iPod downloadable game from PopCap Games. Each level of Peggle features a colorful 2D background filled with different colored "pegs". The objective in each level is to clear all of the orange pegs by hitting them with a ball shot from the top of the screen.
On August 23, 2007, MSNBC named Peggle as one of the "Top 5 most addictive computer games of all time."[1] PC Gamer Magazine (UK) published its own list of their 100 favorite computer games of all time and listed Peggle at 40.[2]
On January 8, 2008, the ESRB revealed the game was heading to the Xbox 360, for Xbox Live Arcade. PopCap released Peggle for the Xbox Live Arcade version on 11 March 2009.[3] On February 7, 2008 it was also claimed that the game would be making its way to the Nintendo DS although PopCap issued a statement denying that a DS version was in the works.[4] It was later announced on July 24, 2008 that a Nintendo DS version was being developed by Q Entertainment for a Winter 2009 release.[5] The game was released on February 25, 2009. It's also rumored an iPhone/iPod Touch version of the game will be released sometime in 2009.
Peggle shares its name with a relatively rare 1991 arcade game; the object of that game is to rotate the entire playing field to keep a bouncing character in play, who bounces off and removes the pegs.[6]

Each board contains a number of blue "pegs" that are laid out in conjunction with the game's background picture. When the player starts each level, 20 of these pegs are randomly assigned as orange pegs, two as green pegs, and one as a purple pin that changes to any remaining blue peg after each round; a game option includes the ability to add shapes to these pegs for those who are color blind. A ball launcher is located at the top middle of the screen, and a ball catcher moves regularly back and forth along the bottom of the screen. In some levels there may be additional objects that will alter the ball's course but do not score points. Many levels feature pegs and other board features that move in a regular pattern or when struck by a ball.[7]
The goal of each level is to clear all the orange pegs by firing balls at the field before the supply of balls are exhausted. The player starts with ten balls but can gain more by having the ball land in the ball catcher or by scoring a certain quantity of points on a single shot. After a peg has been hit, it will be removed from the field after the shot has been completed, or if the ball is stuck on the peg. The player, by clearing orange pegs, increases a scoring multiplier for the remainder of the shots up to a 10x multiplier. While all pegs score points, the player earns more for striking orange ones and the current purple peg. The player may also be awarded "style points" which are awarded for performing tricks with shots, such as consecutively striking two orange balls far apart or gaining a lucky rebound off the ball catcher; style points do not get the multiplier bonus. When the player hits a green peg, they activate the current "magic power" of the character for that level. Some powers activate immediately; one power causes a second ball to be generated from the green peg when struck. Other powers will have effects that activate on the next shot or for several more shots; one power shows the ball's path including rebounds, while another will extend the length of the ball catcher. Once all the orange pegs have been hit, the bottom of the level is replaced with 5 bins of different values that the ball will eventually fall into. The player is awarded this score in addition to any unused balls remaining to get their final score for the level.
In the regular "Adventure" mode of the game, the player attempts to complete five levels with each of the ten "Peggle Masters", followed by an additional five "Master" levels that allow the player to select any of the characters. The game features a series of challenges that require the player to complete boards under stricter requirements, such as having to clear more orange pegs or to remove all the pegs from the board. A "Duel" mode allows the player to compete against another player or the computer on the same board in attempting to reach the highest score. The Xbox Live version adds a "Peg Party" mode, where up to four players compete on their own boards using a limited number of balls, with players attempting to get the highest score.

As part of the Windows version of The Orange Box, PopCap Games has released a The Orange Box-themed shortened version of Peggle named Peggle Extreme. The game contains 10 levels that are not contained within the Peggle full version, and that only allow access to the Bjorn unicorn character and his special power. All levels feature Valve games in some way, combining game character voices and some special features with initial peg layouts that reflect a background image that is related to the featured game. There are three Half-Life 2-themed levels, three Team Fortress 2-themed levels, one Counter-Strike-themed level and three Portal-themed levels. Peggle Extreme also includes five master challenges.[8] Peggle Extreme was also included as a part of the Portal: First Slice offer and the Valve Complete Pack. As of December 12 2008, Valve made Peggle Extreme downloadable for free on PC to everyone with a Steam account.[9]

On September 16, 2008, PopCap released a sequel called Peggle Nights.[1] The sequel featured an additional master that fires electricity.

In April 2009, at I-Series event i36 in Coventry, UK, Cherise Sellers became the first European Peggle Grand Champion, beating Vini Holden in the final.



