Civilization IV
Sid Meier's Civilization IV (Civilization 4 or Civ4) is a strategy computer game released in 2005 and developed by lead designer Soren Johnson under the direction of Sid Meier and Meier's studio Firaxis Games. It is the fourth installment of the Civilization series. Civilization IV was released between October 25 and November 4, 2005 in North America, Europe, and Australia. The game's first expansion, Warlords, was released on July 24, 2006 in the United States and July 28, 2006 in the European Union. A second expansion, Beyond the Sword, was released worldwide between July 18 and July 30, 2007. As of March 26, 2008, Civilization IV has sold 3 million copies according to Take-Two Interactive.[2] The game was re-released along with both its expansions in 2007 in an edition entitled Sid Meier's Civilization IV: Complete.
Civilization IV is a turn-based game in which the player builds an empire from very limited initial resources. All standard full-length games begin in 4000 BC with a settler who builds a single city. From there, the player expands an empire while contending with rival nations, using the geography, developing infrastructure, and encouraging scientific and cultural progress. By default, players can win the game by accomplishing one of five goals: conquering all other civilizations, controlling the majority of the world's land and population, being the first to land a colonizing ship on Alpha Centauri, increasing the Culture ratings of three different cities to "legendary" levels, or by being declared "World Leader" by winning a popularity election through the United Nations. If the game's clock runs out (by default in the year 2050 AD) with none of these goals fulfilled by any nation, the nation with the highest score is declared the winner.
Civilization IV was released in English, German, French, Spanish, Italian, Japanese, and Chinese.


Diplomacy in Civilization generally involves the trading of goods. Specific technologies are required to trade different commodities (for instance, one must know the secret of paper to trade world maps). Players may trade technologies, resources (including luxuries such as wine), maps (to reveal information about the rest of the world) and gold. Advanced diplomacy options include the creation of trade embargoes, the promise of military aid, and the adoption of particular civics and/or a religion. Finally, the United Nations wonder allows the passing of global resolutions (e.g. the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty) in addition to granting access to the diplomatic victory.
The reasoning behind diplomacy is more transparent when compared to Civilization III (Civ3): the Diplomacy window now not only displays the other leader's disposition towards the player (from friendly to furious), but why they feel that way (e.g. "-2: You refused to stop trading with our worst enemies!"). When a leader is sympathetic towards another civilization, they are more likely to accept deals without unfair bargaining.

Instead of receiving generic increases in rank as in Civ3, the player is allowed to "promote" Civilization IV units with specific upgrades that provide bonuses in certain situations (+25% city defense, +25% vs. melee units, etc). There are 41 different types of combat promotions. It is also now possible for players to examine "combat odds" before attacking, giving the player an idea as to whether a given attack will succeed or not.

The game features 32 types of resources which require a terrain improvement (such as a farm or an oil well) to be used or traded. Resources enable construction (a knight unit cannot be built without horses and iron), double the speed of construction (the Pyramids are built twice as fast with stone available) or simply add happiness or health to all cities. To trade goods or to send them to other cities within one's border, they must have some form of connection between the goods and the city. In the later game, this connection can be through ocean tiles, but in the early game, it is limited to roads and rivers. Cities on the same river or same coastline (with the sailing technology) are automatically connected for trading purposes. Unlike in Civ3, the player is no longer able to transfer all production from one project to another, but all production on an already-begun project will remain. For example, if the player is building a temple but decides to switch to a harbor, production on the harbor will start from scratch, but the temple will stay in the building queue and retain all previous progress, aside from some decay over time. As an ancillary rule, if one culture is building a World Wonder but another empire completes it first, the losing culture is compensated with gold proportional to the number of production points lost in the failed attempt to build the wonder.
Trade can be conducted with any civilization that the player has made contact with. AI Civ leaders tend to view resources in two groups. There are key resources such as stone, iron, uranium, and the likes that assist in weapon and building production, and all other resources, such as incense and spices, which are helpful to a Civilization but not necessary for unit production. The AI will typically not trade key resources away unless another key resource is being given. Thus all key resources are considered of equal value to the computer. Similarly all other resources that do not affect units and building are considered equal as well. This can lead to exploitation by using a less valuable Key resource to obtain a high demand one. For instance ivory (elephants) can be traded equally for uranium and the AI will gladly oblige if they are on fair terms with the player. Trading for a single instance of a resource gives you all the benefits of it.

The concept of religion is new to Civilization IV, where in previous games players built generic temples and cathedrals to contribute to happiness and culture. There are now seven distinct religions in the game: Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism and Taoism. Each religion in the default game is associated with a specific technology on the tech tree; the first civilization that gains the technology founds the religion. For example, Christianity is founded by the civilization that discovers "Theology" before any of the others do. The four later religions (Christianity, Confucianism, Islam, and Taoism) begin with a free Missionary unit for reasons of game balance; missionaries can later be trained only at a city that has constructed an associated monastery. Custom games can link the founding of a religion to a technology but the player has their pick of which religion is founded. Other than this, there are no special traits or bonuses associated with any particular religion in order to avoid controversy.[3]
Religion factors into a number of existing game mechanics. Civilizations that share a common state religion will find themselves more agreeable in their diplomatic dealings; conversely, civilizations with differing state religions will not be as close diplomatically. The religion's founder may also receive an economic benefit: if that civilization expends a Great Prophet at their religion's holy (founding) city, they will construct that religion's most sacred building, and it will generate 1 gold per turn for every other city that hosts said religion. If a player has a missionary, it can be sent into a friendly or rival city to spread the religion of the missionary. Once a religion has spread to a city, there is no way it can be removed. Finally, if a civilization has adopted a religion as a state religion and owns that religion's holy city, they will receive 'line-of-sight' (fog of war is lifted) in every other city hosting that religion.
When it comes to selecting a player's civic options, there are five under the "religion" category. Players impose a theocracy, adopt pacifism, have freedom of worship or have an organised and integrated religious policy. These civics can provide a great incentive to spread a state religion throughout one's empire, as the best bonuses will only be applied to cities in which the religion is present. Atheism is not a religious choice in the game.

Each of the eighteen civilizations has at least one leader, and eight have two leaders. Each leader has two 'personality traits' which offer bonuses to various game mechanics, as well as a distinct personality and behavior. Several historic figures not used in previous Civilization games, but included in Civ IV are: Asoka, Cyrus II, Franklin D. Roosevelt, George Washington, Hatsheput, Mansa Musa, Kublai Khan, Peter the Great, Qin Shi Huang, Saladin (though Saladin was a hidden leader in Civilization II), and Queen Victoria. Some art assets also existed in the game files for a Sumerian civilization led by Gilgamesh and they were used by the modding community to introduce the Sumerians into the game. Other unfinished art included leader head artwork for Pericles, Augustus, and Menes. Gilgamesh, Pericles and Augustus were officially added in the expansion packs later.[4]
All civilizations have some element of uniqueness and all leaders have certain traits based on their achievements in life. All civilizations also have a unique unit, which replaces a standard unit (such as Persian Immortals replacing Chariots).

As in prior versions of Civilization, a set of technologies are arranged in a tech tree. A total of 86 are included in the game, up from 81 in Civilization III.[5] Technologies have many uses; they can be used for trade, for the construction of new terrain improvements, units, buildings and wonders, to reveal new resources, for the founding of new religions, or for the development of new forms of government. To discover a new technology, it is first necessary to discover the prerequisite technologies (for example, democracy can only be discovered after the printing press).
Unlike previous versions, Technology development is flexible: certain technologies can be discovered by following more than just one path, and others (all six starting technologies, for example hunting) are not linked to any technology and must be found from scratch. The game's technology tree displays all the techs in the game and their relation with one another, and allows the player to queue any number of technologies for research. If multiple paths lead to the target technology, the AI will pick the shortest. The final technology in the game, as in previous versions, is called "Future Tech", followed by a number; each iteration of it imparts a happiness and health bonus to that nation's cities. In previous Civ games, Future tech gave a score bonus, but no gameplay advantages.
The discovery of each technology is announced by the game's narrator, Leonard Nimoy of Star Trek fame. In the single-player game, he reads off a famous quotation pertaining to the technology; the sources of the quotations range from the Buddha, Charles Darwin and the Bible to Lonnie Donegan, Steve Wozniak, Dan Quayle, and a monotonic "Beep. Beep. Beep." attributed to the Sputnik space probe. In multi-player games, Nimoy simply declares, "You have discovered [Name of Technology]."

The game features a number of World Wonders which bestow certain advantages to the city or the empire of the civilization that construct it. A number of World Wonders which have been present in earlier versions of the game have been tweaked to reduce their overall effect on the game dynamic. For example, in prior versions the Pyramids (granary in every city) and Sistene Chapel (cathedral in every city) could dramatically alter the balance of gameplay. In Civilization IV, many of the World Wonders provide a temporary boost to money, science and a permanent boost to culture. A Wonder can only be built once although multiple civilizations can compete to be the first to complete said wonder.
There are a number of National Wonders which can be built by all civilizations once which give city-specific bonuses and often have a particular pre-requisite gameplay conditions to permit construction as well the relevant technologies. Only two National Wonders can be built in any one city (National Wonders created by expending Great Prophets in the Holy City of a religion are immune from this limitation) which encourages players to think strategically about which National Wonders should be built in which cities.

In Civilization IV the leadership skills of players are compared to a subjective list of twenty of the best or worst leaders in history, similar to the list in the first Civilization game. The score is based on a number of factors, including military growth and success, population size and attitude, technological advancement, turns taken to win, construction of wonders and economic growth.
The released version of the game abandoned Civilization III's graded scale. In Civ3, a spectacular victory on the easiest difficulty would provide the player with only a middling score, and the best titles were only awarded to players attempting the hardest difficulties. The original Civilization, as well as Civilization IV, on the other hand, allows the player to obtain any score on any difficulty level. As of the v1.61 patch, the grading system has returned to the curved-by-difficulty scale.



Many aspects of Civilization IV are new to the series. These include:

