The Sandman (Vertigo)
The Sandman is a comic book series written by Neil Gaiman and published in the United States by the DC Comics imprint Vertigo. It chronicles the adventures of Dream of The Endless, who rules over the world of dreams, in 75 issues from 1989 until 1996.
The Sandman was one of Vertigo's flagship titles, and is available as a series of ten trade paperbacks. It is also being reprinted in a recolored four-volume Absolute hardcover edition with slipcase.[citation needed] Critically acclaimed, The Sandman was the only comic to ever win the World Fantasy Award,[1] and is one of the few comic books ever to be on the New York Times Bestseller List, along with Watchmen and The Dark Knight Returns. Norman Mailer described the series as "a comic book for intellectuals."[2]

The Sandman's main character is Morpheus, the Lord of Dreams, who is essentially the anthropomorphic personification of dreams. At the start of the series, Morpheus is captured by an occult ritual and held prisoner for 70 years. Morpheus escapes in the modern day and after revenging himself upon his captors, sets about rebuilding his kingdom, which has fallen into disrepair in his absence. Gaiman himself has summarized the plot of the series (in the foreword to Endless Nights) as "The Lord of Dreams learns that one must change or die, and makes his decision."
The character's initially haughty and often cruel manner begins to soften after his years of imprisonment at the start of the series, but the challenge of undoing past sins and changing old ways is an enormous one for a being who has been set in his ways for billions of years. In its beginnings, the series is a very dark horror comic. Later, the series evolves into an elaborate fantasy series, incorporating elements of classical and contemporary mythology, ultimately placing its protagonist in the role of a tragic hero.
The story-lines primarily take place in the Dreaming, Morpheus's realm, and the waking world, with occasional visits to other domains, such as Hell, Faerie, Asgard, and the domains of the other Endless. Many used the contemporary United States of America and the United Kingdom as a backdrop. The DC Universe was the official setting of the series, but well-known DC characters and places were rarely featured after 1990, with one exception: Lyta Hall, formerly Fury of the 1980s super-team Infinity Inc., figures prominently in the "Kindly Ones" story arc. Various characters from the series did appear in other DC Universe comics however, including an appearance by Daniel during Grant Morrison's JLA run. Most of the storylines take place in modern times, but many short stories are set in the past, taking advantage of the immortal nature of many of the characters, and deal with historical individuals and events.

The Sandman grew out of a proposal by Neil Gaiman to revive the 1970s Sandman series illustrated by Jack Kirby. Gaiman had considered including characters from DC Comics' "Dream Stream" (including the Kirby Sandman, Brute, Glob, and the brothers Cain and Abel) in a scene for the first issue of his 1988 miniseries Black Orchid. While the scene did not make it into later drafts, Gaiman soon began constructing a treatment for a new series. Gaiman mentioned his treatment in passing to DC editor Karen Berger. While months later Berger offered Gaiman a comic title to work on, he was unsure his Sandman pitch would be accepted. However, weeks later Berger asked Gaiman if he was interested in doing a Sandman series. Gaiman recalled, "I said, 'Um...yes. Yes, definitely. What's the catch?' [Berger said] 'There's only one. We'd like a new Sandman. Keep the name. But the rest is up to you.'"[3]
Gaiman crafted the new character from an initial image of "a man, young, pale and naked, imprisoned in a tiny cell, waiting until his captors passed away [...] deathly thin, with long dark hair, and strange eyes." Gaiman patterned the character's black attire on a print of a Japanese kimono as well as his own wardrobe. Gaiman wrote an eight-issue outline and gave it to Dave McKean and Leigh Baulch, who drew character sketches. Berger reviewed the sketches (along with some drawn by Gaiman) and suggested Sam Kieth as the series' artist.[4] Mike Dringenberg, Todd Klein, Robbie Busch, and Dave McKean were hired as inker, letterer, colorist, and cover artist, respectively. McKean's approach towards comics covers was unconventional, for he convinced Berger that the series' protagonist did not need to appear on every cover.[5]
The debut issue of The Sandman was cover-dated January 1989. Gaiman described the early issues as "awkward", for he, as well as Kieth, Dringenberg and Busch, had never worked on a regular series before. Kieth quit while working on the third issue; he was replaced by Dringenberg as penciler, who was in turn replaced by Malcolm Jones III as inker.[4]
The Sandman became a cult success for DC Comics and attracted an audience unlike that of mainstream comics: half the readership was female, many were in their twenties, and many read no other comics at all. By the time the series concluded in 1996, it was outselling the titles of DC's flagship character Superman. Gaiman had a finite run in mind for the series, and it concluded with issue 75. Gaiman said in 1996, "Could I do another five issues of Sandman? Well, damn right. And would I be able to look at myself in the mirror happily? No. Is it time to stop because I've reached the end, yes, and I think I'd rather leave while I'm in love."[6]

The Sandman was initially published as a monthly serial, in 32-page comic books (with some exceptions to this pattern). As the series quickly increased in popularity, DC Comics began to reprint them in hardcover and paperback editions, each representing either a complete novel or a collection of related short stories.
DC first published "The Doll's House" storyline in a collection called simply The Sandman. Shortly thereafter, the first three volumes were published and named independently and also collected in an eponymous boxed set. (Death's debut story, "The Sound of Her Wings" from issue #8, appeared both at the beginning of early editions of The Doll's House and at the end of Preludes and Nocturnes, creating overlap between the first two volumes. This overlap isn't present in newer editions.) Further collections would then be released shortly after their completion in serial form.

A total of ten collections contain the full run of the series and have all been kept in print. They are as follows:

Neil Gaiman, on his blog, announced plans for an Absolute Sandman which would compile all 10 volumes.[7] The DC Absolute Edition series are large 8" by 12" prints of a considerably higher quality than the library edition, and include a leather-like cover and a slipcase. Many of the early stories have been extensively retouched and/or recoloured with Gaiman's approval.
In October 2006, the first volume of the Absolute Edition Sandman was published; it collected the first 20 issues (that is, Preludes and Nocturnes, The Doll's House, and Dream Country). The volume also features a copy of the original series outline and other bonus features, such as a new introduction by the president of DC Comics, a new afterword, and a reproduction of the original comic draft and notes for A Midsummer Night's Dream.[8] In celebration of this reissuing DC also issued a refurbished edition of the first issue of the series. Volume 2 of The Absolute Sandman was officially released October 31, 2007[2]. The third volume was released on June 11, 2008 [3], and the fourth (and final) volume was released November 5, 2008 [4].
With the success of the Absolute Sandman editions DC is currently considering publishing an Absolute Sandman Supplemental collecting Endless Nights, The Dream Hunters and Sandman Midnight Theatre [5].

In 1998, the cover images from The Sandman were released as one compiled volume:
In 1999, some years after Gaiman completed The Sandman, he wrote a lavishly illustrated Sandman novel, Sandman: The Dream Hunters with art by Yoshitaka Amano. Like many of the single-issue stories throughout The Sandman, Morpheus appears in Dream Hunters, but is a supporting character at best. In Gaiman's afterword to the book, it is claimed that the story was a retelling of an existing Japanese legend. However, there is no trace of it in the primary source he cites [9], and when asked Gaiman has stated that he made up the "legend" out of whole cloth.
As the 10th anniversary arrived, Gaiman wrote several new stories about Morpheus and his siblings, one story for each, which were published in 2003 as the Endless Nights anthology.

Owing to critical acclaim and commercial success (at the time of its conclusion, it was DC’s best-selling series), Sandman spawned a number of spin-off volumes. Subsidiary works include:

The Sandman issue #19 "A Midsummer Night's Dream" won the World Fantasy Award in 1991 for Best Short Fiction. Also, Sandman and its spin-offs have won eighteen Eisner Awards, including three for Best Continuing Series, one for Best Short Story, four for Best Writer (Neil Gaiman), seven for Best Lettering (Todd Klein) and one for Best Graphic Album:Reprint. The Sandman: The Dream Hunters was nominated for the 
