Agnosticism
Agnosticism (Greek: Œ±- a-, without + Œ≥ŒΩœéœÉŒπœÇ gn≈çsis, knowledge; after Gnosticism) is the philosophical view that the truth value of certain claims†‚Äî particularly metaphysical claims regarding theology, afterlife or the existence of deities, ghosts, or even ultimate reality†‚Äî is unknown or, depending on the form of agnosticism, inherently impossible to prove or disprove. It is often put forth as a middle ground between theism and atheism,[1] though it is not a religious declaration in itself.
Demographic research services normally list agnostics in the same category as atheists and/or non-religious people,[2] using 'agnostic' in the sense of 'noncommittal'.[3][dubious ‚Äì discuss] However, this can be misleading given the existence of agnostic theists, who identify themselves as both agnostics in the original sense and followers of a particular religion.
Philosophers and thinkers who have written about agnosticism include Thomas Henry Huxley, Albert Einstein, Robert G. Ingersoll, and Bertrand Russell. Religious scholars who wrote about agnosticism are Peter Kreeft, Blaise Pascal and Joseph Ratzinger, later elected as Pope Benedict XVI.

'Agnostic' was introduced by Thomas Henry Huxley in 1860 to describe his philosophy which rejects Gnosticism, by which he meant not simply the early 1st millennium religious group, but all claims to spiritual or mystical knowledge.[3][dubious ‚Äì discuss]
Early Christian church leaders used the Greek word gnosis (knowledge) to describe "spiritual knowledge." Agnosticism is not to be confused with religious views opposing the doctrine of gnosis and Gnosticism‚Äîthese are religious concepts that are not generally related to agnosticism. Huxley used the term in a broad sense.
In recent years, use of the word to mean "not knowable" is apparent in scientific literature in psychology and neuroscience,[4] and with a meaning close to "independent", in technical and marketing literature, e.g. "platform agnostic" or "hardware agnostic".

Scottish Enlightenment philosopher David Hume contended that meaningful statements about the universe are always qualified by some degree of doubt.[5] The fallibility of human beings means that they cannot obtain absolute certainty except in trivial cases where a statement is true by definition (as in, "all bachelors are unmarried" or "all triangles have three angles"). All rational statements that assert a factual claim about the universe that begin "I believe that ...." are simply shorthand for, "Based on my knowledge, understanding, and interpretation of the prevailing evidence, I tentatively believe that...." For instance, when one says, "I believe that Lee Harvey Oswald shot John F. Kennedy," one is not asserting an absolute truth but a tentative belief based on interpretation of the assembled evidence. Even though one may set an alarm clock prior to the following day, believing that waking up will be possible, that belief is tentative, tempered by a small but finite degree of doubt (the earth might be destroyed, or one might die before the alarm goes off).
The Catholic Church sees merit in examining what it calls Partial Agnosticism, specifically those systems that "do not aim at constructing a complete philosophy of the Unknowable, but at excluding special kinds of truth, notably religious, from the domain of knowledge."[6] However, the Church is historically opposed to a full denial of the ability of human reason to know God. The Council of the Vatican, relying on biblical scripture, declares that "God, the beginning and end of all, can, by the natural light of human reason, be known with certainty from the works of creation" (Const. De Fide, II, De Rev.)[7]

Agnosticism can be subdivided into several subcategories. Recently suggested variations include:

Among the most famous agnostics (in the original sense) have been Thomas Henry Huxley, Robert G. Ingersoll and Bertrand Russell.

Agnostic views are as old as philosophical skepticism, but the terms agnostic and agnosticism were created by Huxley to sum up his thoughts on contemporary developments of metaphysics about the "unconditioned" (Hamilton) and the "unknowable" (Herbert Spencer). It is important, therefore, to discover Huxley's own views on the matter. Though Huxley began to use the term "agnostic" in 1869, his opinions had taken shape some time before that date. In a letter of September 23, 1860, to Charles Kingsley, Huxley discussed his views extensively:
And again, to the same correspondent, May 6, 1863:
Of the origin of the name agnostic to describe this attitude, Huxley gave the following account:[10]
Huxley's agnosticism is believed to be a natural consequence of the intellectual and philosophical conditions of the 1860s, when clerical intolerance was trying to suppress scientific discoveries which appeared to clash with a literal reading of the Book of Genesis and other established Jewish and Christian doctrines. Agnosticism should not, however, be confused with natural theology, deism, pantheism, or other science positive forms of theism.
By way of clarification, Huxley states, "In matters of the intellect, follow your reason as far as it will take you, without regard to any other consideration. And negatively: In matters of the intellect, do not pretend that conclusions are certain which are not demonstrated or demonstrable" (Huxley, Agnosticism, 1889). While A. W. Momerie has noted that this is nothing but a definition of honesty, Huxley's usual definition goes beyond mere honesty to insist that these metaphysical issues are fundamentally unknowable.

Robert G. Ingersoll, an Illinois lawyer and politician who evolved into a well-known and sought-after orator in 19th century America, has been referred to as the "Great Agnostic."
In an 1896 lecture titled Why I Am An Agnostic, Ingersoll related why he was an agnostic:
In the conclusion of the speech he simply sums up the agnostic position as:

Bertrand Russell's pamphlet, Why I Am Not a Christian, based on a speech delivered in 1927 and later included in a book of the same title, is considered a classic statement of agnosticism. The essay briefly lays out Russell‚Äôs objections to some of the arguments for the existence of God before discussing his moral objections to Christian teachings. He then calls upon his readers to "stand on their own two feet and look fair and square at the world," with a "fearless attitude and a free intelligence."
In 1939, Russell gave a lecture on The existence and nature of God, in which he characterized himself as an atheist. He said:
However, later in the same lecture, discussing modern non-anthropomorphic concepts of God, Russell states:
In Russell's 1947 pamphlet, Am I An Atheist Or An Agnostic? (subtitled A Plea For Tolerance In The Face Of New Dogmas), he ruminates on the problem of what to call himself:
In his 1953 essay, What Is An Agnostic? Russell states:
However, later in the essay, Russell says:

Religious scholars, whether Jewish, Hindu, Muslim or Christian, affirm the possibility of knowledge, even of metaphysical realities such as God and the soul,[13] because, these scholars assert, that human intelligence has a non-material, spiritual element. They affirm that ‚Äúnot being able to see or hold some specific thing does not necessarily negate its existence,‚Äù as in the case of gravity, entropy, mental telepathy, or reason and thought.[14]
According to these scholars, agnosticism is impossible in actual practice, since a person can live only either as if God did not exist (etsi Deus non daretur), or as if God did exist (etsi Deus daretur).[15][16][17] These scholars believe that each day in a person‚Äôs life is an unavoidable step towards death, and thus not to decide for or against God, the all-encompassing foundation, purpose, and meaning of life, is to decide in favor of atheism.[18][15] Even if there were truly no evidence for God, Christian Philosopher Blaise Pascal offered to agnostics what is known as Pascal‚Äôs Wager, the infinite expected value of acknowledging God is always greater than the finite expected value of not acknowledging his existence, and thus it is a safer ‚Äúbet‚Äù to choose God.[18]
These religious scholars argue that God has placed in his creation much evidence of his existence,[14] and continues to personally speak to humans.[19] Peter Kreeft and Ronald Tacelli write about a strong, cumulative case with their 20 rational arguments for God‚Äôs existence.[20] And, these scholars state, if agnostics demanded from God that he prove his existence through laboratory testing, they would be asking God, the supreme being, to become man‚Äôs servant.[21]
According to Joseph Ratzinger, later Pope Benedict XVI, agnosticism, more specifically strong agnosticism i.e. ignosticism, is reasoning that limits and contradicts itself in claiming the power of reason to know scientific truth, but not religious or philosophical truths.[22][19] He blames the exclusion of religion from ethics and reasoning (i.e. secularism) for the dangerous pathologies of religion and science such as human and ecological disasters.[22][19][23] ‚ÄúAgnosticism,‚Äù said Ratzinger, ‚Äúis always the fruit of a refusal of that knowledge which is in fact offered to man [...] The knowledge of God has always existed.‚Äù[22] Agnosticism, stated Ratzinger, is a choice of comfort, pride, dominion, and utility over truth, and is opposed by the following attitudes: the keenest self-criticism, humble listening to the whole of existence, the persistent patience and self-correction of the scientific method, a readiness to be purified by the truth.[19]


