List of Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles episodes
The following is a complete episode list for the FOX science fiction drama series Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles. The series follows the characters of Sarah and John Connor (portrayed by Lena Headey and Thomas Dekker, respectively) after the events of Terminator 2: Judgment Day. In the pilot, the pair are transported from 1999 to 2007 by a terminator named Cameron Phillips (Summer Glau) who was sent back from the year 2027 to protect John. From that point, the show chronicles the trio's attempt to stop the computer system Skynet from going online, triggering a nuclear holocaust and declaring war on mankind in an apocalyptic future.
The Sarah Connor Chronicles premiered on Sunday, January 13, 2008 after the New York Giants and Dallas Cowboys playoff game[1] at 9/8c to the highest ratings for a scripted television program on FOX in seven years and the most viewers for a scripted show on the network in eight years. Additionally, it also had the highest ratings of a scripted program debut during prime time among adults 18-34 and 18-49 (key demographics for advertisers) in three years and the most viewers for a scripted program premiere in two years.[2] A second episode followed the next day, Monday, in the show's regular timeslot at 9/8c.
Due to the 2007-2008 Writers Guild of America strike, only nine of the original thirteen episodes for the first season were completed.[3]
The producers of the show announced that it was renewed for a second season, initially for only 13 episodes.[4] The new season began airing on September 8, 2008 in the United States. On October 17, 2008 the network gave the show a full second season order, bringing the total number of season 2 episodes to 22.[5] The series went on a brief hiatus mid-season, from December 16, 2008, to February 13, 2009. When it returned, it was scheduled with Joss Whedon's Dollhouse on Friday nights.
As of April 3, 2009 (2009 -04-03)[update], a total of 30 episodes of Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles have aired.



Three days after they arrive in 2007, Cameron takes Sarah to get new identities from four resistance fighters that were also sent back. Finding three dead, one missing and another terminator whom the pair fight off, Sarah elects to visit Enrique to obtain new IDs. Meanwhile John grows frustrated at being contained in the house; Sarah is told by Cameron that she died from cancer in 2005, and remnants of Cromartie begin to reassemble. The episode ends with Sarah taking tests, clearly frightened by what Cameron had told her.

Today is the Day, pt.2 was named Last Voyage of the Jimmy Carter in FOX press releases, which is incorrect. The production team decided to make Today... a two-part episode late in the episode's filming, and titled additional scenes written for insertion across both parts as Last Voyage... to eliminate any confusion during the production.[16]

