Cult of the Dead Cow
CULT OF THE DEAD COW, also known as cDc or cDc Communications, is a computer hacker and DIY media organization founded in 1984 in Lubbock, Texas. The group maintains a weblog on its site, also titled "CULT OF THE DEAD COW". New media are released first through the blog, which also features thoughts and opinions of the group's members.
To further the Cult's stated goal of "Global Domination Through Media Saturation," over the years cDc members have granted interviews to major newspapers, print magazines, online news sites, and international television news programs.

The group was formed in June 1984 at the Farm Pac slaughterhouse by Grandmaster Ratte' (aka Swamp Ratte'), Franken Gibe, and Sid Vicious, three BBS SysOps. The slaughterhouse, a hangout of many Lubbock youth, burned in 1996. (The burned out building was used as a haunted house for several Halloweens after that. In 2001, the grounds surrounding it were converted into the "West Texas Canyon Amphitheater," which closed in 2004.)
In December 1990, cDc member Drunkfux gave birth to the modern hacker con. HoHoCon, usually held in Houston, Texas, was the first hacker conference which invited the participation of both journalists and law enforcement. In all, dFx hosted five annual HoHoCons.
In 1991, cDc was named "Sassiest Underground Computer Group" by Sassy Magazine. Also in 1991, the group began distributing music in the form of cassette tape albums sold through its post office box. Many of these albums are now available online in their entirety.
October 1994 saw the creation of the cDc's Usenet newsgroup, alt.fan.cult-dead-cow.[1] It was thus the first hacking group to have its own Usenet newsgroup. In November of that year, the group claimed responsibility for giving Ronald Reagan Alzheimer's disease, claiming to have done so in 1986 with a blowgun.[2]
The cDc declared war on the Church of Scientology in 1995 during the alt.religion.scientology controversy,[3][4] stating
In 1997, before online distribution of audio files was common, the cDc began distributing original MP3-format music on its website.[5]
In February 2000, the cDc was the subject of an 11-minute documentary short entitled "Disinformation." Also in February 2000, cDc member Mudge briefed President Bill Clinton on internet security.[6]

cDc communications is the parent organization of CULT OF THE DEAD COW. However, CULT OF THE DEAD COW is just one of three groups that fall under cDc communications. The other two are the Ninja Strike Force and Hacktivismo.

In 1996, the cDc announced the birth of its Ninja Strike Force, a group of "ninja" dedicated to achieving the goals of the cDc, both online and offline.[7] The cDc opened the NSF Dojo in 2004. An NSF Member also operates a streaming radio station, which features recordings of hacker con presentations and other educational programming in addition to a wide range of musical styles and artists.
Membership in the NSF is granted by the cDc to those individuals who stand out in their support of the cDc and its ideals. Members are recognized for their abilities, capabilities, and being the best of the best in their skills.
In 2006, the Ninja Strike Force launched its own website.

In late 1999, the cDc created Hacktivismo, an independent group under the cDc communications umbrella dedicated to the creation of anti-censorship technology in furtherance of human rights on the Internet. Hacktivismo's beliefs include access to information as a basic human right. The group's beliefs are described fully in The Hacktivismo Declaration, which seeks to apply the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights to the Internet.[8] Hacktivismo has also authored its own software license agreement, the Hacktivismo Enhanced-Source Software License Agreement, which is source available (but not open source).[9]

In addition to the obvious associations between CULT OF THE DEAD COW, Hacktivismo, and the Ninja Strike Force, the cDc also has crossover associations with several other organizations. These include the L0pht; founding members White Knight and Count Zero and final members Dildog and Mudge are all members of cDc. Additionally, THE NIGHTSTALKER was a member of Youth International Party Line/Technology Assistance Program. Lord Digital, one of the founders of Mindvox, is a former member of LOD/H and a current member of the Sacrament of Transition. Red Knight was a member of the Masters of Deception. Reid Fleming is a staff member of Soylent Communications. Also, RaD Man, a member of the Ninja Strike Force, is one of the founders of ACiD Productions. Another NSF member, Mark Hinge, is a founding member of the British hacker group The Syndicate Of London. Flack, another Ninja Strike Force member, was a co-founder of the horror "lit group" Soulz at Zero. Jacob Appelbaum is the official monochrom ambassador.

During the 1980s, the cDc was well known throughout the BBS scene for their underground ezine, also called CULT OF THE DEAD COW, which they continue to produce to this day. The group claims to have invented the ezine, but this claim is difficult to prove or disprove.
The ezine has led to some criticism of the group over the years; in a 1994 episode of Geraldo entitled "Computer Vice," Geraldo Rivera referred to the group as "a bunch of sickos" for having published an article called "Sex with Satan," originally published in 1988.[10][11]

In 1994, cDc member Omega coined the term "hacktivism."[12] The group has been active in hacktivist causes since that time.

In the late 1990s, the cDc claimed to work with a group of Chinese dissidents called "The Hong Kong Blondes." The goal of the Hong Kong Blondes was to disrupt computer networks within the People's Republic of China in order to allow Chinese citizens to access censored content online. The Hong Kong Blondes were, arguably, one of the first hacktivist groups. The cDc advised the group on strong encryption techniques, among other things.[13][14][15][16] The cDc formally severed ties with the Hong Kong Blondes in December 1998.[17]

On January 7, 1999, the cDc joined with an international coalition of hackers to denounce a call to cyberwar against the governments of China and Iraq.[18]

When questioning Dr. Patrick Ball during his International War Crimes Tribunal in 2002, Slobodan Milošević asked Dr. Ball about his relationship with the cDc.[19] Ball had given a talk and been a member of a cDc-sponsored panel on hacktivism at DEF CON 9 in 2001.

In early 2006, the cDc launched the "Goolag" (a play on gulag, Soviet concentration camps) campaign in response to Google's decision to comply with China's Internet censorship policy and censor search results in the mainland-Chinese version of its search engine. The campaign consists primarily of the use of a parody of Google's logo which reads "Goolag: Exporting censorship, one search at a time."[20][21][22] The group encouraged readers to make t-shirts and other merchandise and donate any proceeds from their sale to Human Rights in China.
Students for a Free Tibet held an anti-Google rally in Dharamsala, India on February 14, 2006, employing the logo in a variety of ways.[23] The cDc then issued a press release about the campaign, wherein it described Microsoft, Yahoo!, Google, and Cisco as the "Gang of Four" due to their respective policies of compliance with the Beijing government's Internet policies. The United States Congress was also called out on this issue in the release.[24] This press release, originally entitled "Congresss jerks off, gang of four reach for raincoats," was picked up by many news sources, as an abbreviated version of it was distributed by PR Web (with the altered title of "CULT OF THE DEAD COW (cDc) Launches Campaign Against Internet Censorship in China").[25]

The cDc has released several tools, for both hackers/system administrators and for the general public. Many of these are related to computer security and are sometimes dubbed "hacker tools".

The Automated Prayer Project, written by Javaman, is "a VT420 connected to a Sun Ultra5 via a serial cable which displays the output of a continuously running program. The signaling rate is limited to 9600 baud. The program itself cycles through the Rosary, displaying a new individual prayer once every thirty seconds. Each individual prayer is then sent out via UDP to a random machine on the Internet on a random port."

Back Orifice (often shortened to BO) is a controversial computer program designed for remote system administration. It enables a user to control a computer running Microsoft Windows operating system from a remote location. The name is a pun on Microsoft BackOffice Server software. The program debuted at DEF CON 6 on August 1, 1998. It was the brainchild of Sir Dystic. According to the group, its purpose was to demonstrate the lack of security in Microsoft's operating system Windows 98.[26]

Back Orifice 2000 (often shortened to BO2k) is a computer program that is similar in function to Back Orifice. Back Orifice 2000 debuted on July 10, 1999 at DEF CON 7. The original code was written by Dildog. Whereas the original Back Orifice was limited to the Windows 95 and Windows 98 operating systems, BO2k also supports Windows NT, Windows XP and Windows 2000. Some BO2k client functionality has also been implemented for Linux-systems. In addition, BO2k was released as free software.[27] As of 2007, BO2k is being actively developed.

Camera/Shy was the first Hacktivismo project released. It debuted in 2002 at the H.O.P.E. 2k2 convention in New York City. It is a steganographic tool that scans for and delivers decrypted content directly from the world wide web.[28]

NBName is a computer program that can be used to carry out denial-of-service attacks that can disable NetBIOS services on Windows machines. It was written by Sir Dystic and released July 29, 2000 at the DEF CON 8 convention in Las Vegas.

ScatterChat is an encrypted instant messaging client based on Gaim. It was written by J. Salvatore Testa II and released at the H.O.P.E. Number Six conference in New York City on July 22, 2006. It provides encryption as well as integrated onion routing with Tor, and secure file transfers.[29][30][31] Various flaws in the software have been elaborated by researchers[32][33].

The Six/Four System, a censorship resistant network proxy written by Mixter, a member of both cDc and Hacktivismo. It works by using "trusted peers" to relay network connections over SSL encrypted links[34] Hacktivismo and the cDc further gained notoriety in 2003 when the Six/Four System became the first product of a hacker group to receive approval from the United States Department of Commerce for export of strong encryption.[35]

SMBRelay and SMBRelay2 are computer programs that can be used to carry out SMB man-in-the-middle attacks on Windows machines. They were written by Sir Dystic and released March 
