Zune
Zune is the product-line brand name for the Zune portable media players, Zune software, and Zune Marketplace services sold by Microsoft, which provide online music, video, and podcast downloads.[6] Zune's primary competitors are the Apple iTunes/iPod product line and the SanDisk Sansa line. Zune players come in two variants, one hard-drive based and the other flash-memory based. Both play music, videos, and podcasts, display images, and receive (but not record) FM radio with RDS. They can share files wirelessly with other Zunes and via USB with Xbox 360s and Windows PCs. Any Zune can also be synced wirelessly with a Windows PC. The Zune is currently not compatible with Mac OS X or Linux.
Zune software, which runs on Windows XP, Vista, and Windows 7 allows users to manage files on the player, rip audio CDs, manage music, and buy songs, music videos, and TV shows at the Zune Marketplace online store using Microsoft Points or a Zune Pass, which allows the subscriber to download unlimited songs temporarily and permanently keep ten favorite songs each month.[7]

The first Zune model, the Zune 30, was released in the United States on November 14, 2006. Featuring 30GB of capacity, built in Wifi, FM radio, and a 3 inch screen, the Zune 30 came in black, brown or white. Basic headphones, a carrying case, USB cord, and software CD were all included in the original package.
The Zune 4, 8 and the 80 were announced on October 2, 2007[8] as the beginning of the V2 set of Zunes. The new Zune 80 features a 3.2 inch screen, while the Zune 4 and 8 come with an 1.8 inch screen. Both come with a new touchpad-style input device and new software (also available for the Zune 30.) Additional file support for H.264 and MPEG-4 file was also included, although the older Zune 30 requires these formats to be transcoded to WMV prior to sync. The ability to sync wirelessly (automatically if connected to a power supply,) podcast support, and an upgraded song-sharing licensing are now available on all models. The new software also allows a Zune to communicate with other Zunes to share pictures and songs. A free firmware update added the new software features to the original Zune 30, and was released on November 13, 2007.[9] The Zune 80 comes bundled with a USB connection cord and premium headphones. The Zune 4 and 8 come with a USB connection cord and standard headphones.

The first-generation Zune was created by Microsoft in close cooperation with Toshiba, which took the design of the Gigabeat S and redeveloped it under the name Toshiba 1089 as registered with the FCC starting in the year 2006.[10] Xbox 360 overseer J Allard ran the project, codenamed ‘Argo’, staffed with Xbox and MSN Music Store developers[11] who worked on ‘Alexandria’, finalized as Zune Marketplace.[12] Both products were later united under the Zune brand name in the U.S. market.
The second-generation Zune 4 GB, 8 GB, and 80 GB are manufactured by Flextronics. The 4 and 8 GB Zunes are flash-based and smaller in size than the 80 GB version. The 30GB Zune was not redesigned.

On September 8, 2008, Microsoft announced the Zune 3.0 update. Included in this update are the abilities to tag and later purchase songs heard on FM radio, channels which can be customized to deliver suggested songs for the user, and the ability to purchase songs from the Zune device via the Zune Marketplace, all wirelessly available. The update also included sample games - Hexic, Space Battle, Sudoku, checkers, and Texas Hold' em. In addition, support for audiobooks from online stores like Audible.com, and Public libraries that support OverDrive media files such as the Free Library of Philadelphia was added.[13][14][15] Other noticeable changes included the introduction of a clock and changed "quicklist" functionality. Zunes feature games developed using XNA with custom soundtracks and 8-player wireless multiplayer using the built-in Wi-Fi. An early version of XNA Game Studio 3.0 released on May 7, 2008 allows developers to work on Zune games.[16]
On November 18, 2008, the Zune 3.1 update was released. Primarily a stability-oriented release, it also introduced a few additional games for Zune devices. A new policy announced on November 20, 2008 allows Zune Pass customers to download 10 tracks per month in the protection-free MP3 format (if available) for permanent ownership; otherwise, WMA protected format will be downloaded, in addition to the existing "all you can eat" subscription usage at an unchanged monthly cost.


For the main articles, see Zune 30, Zune 4, 8, 16 and Zune 80, 120.
The 30 GB Zune, the first Zune music player, has a 30 GB hard drive, 3” screen, and simple directional pad for menu navigation. The second generation of the Zune consists of the Zune 4GB, 8GB, 16GB, 80GB and 120GB. The Zune 4, 8 and 16 feature a smaller size and hold 4, 8 and 16GB of flash memory, respectively. The 80GB Zune, the replacement for the Zune 30, is thinner and lighter. All the second generation Zunes have a Zune Pad instead of the simple directional pad that was included on the Zune 30. Microsoft released an upgrade for all Zune models, including the Zune 30, to the second generation software/firmware. On the back of all models it says "Hello From Seattle (Model #) Assembled in China", signifying that Microsoft is based in Seattle and the Zune is assembled in China.
In June 2008, Microsoft's Robbie Bach, in an interview with the SFGate said that a touch-operated Zune that will be "a cornerstone of what we do," is in the works. Although Microsoft has not yet officially announced the "Zune Touch", pictures surfaced on the web showing that the "Zune Touch" uses a similar interface as its predecessors. Those pictures turned out to be photoshopped Zune 80gb .[17]

Zune featured preloaded content in both audio and video formats from various artists like BT, The Thermals, Paul Oakenfold, and CSS. Special editions featured their own unique set of content.


The standard Zune comes with earphones and a USB data cable. The Zune 30 comes with these items plus a carrying bag, and the Zune 80 model adds upgraded "Zune Premium" headphones. Accessories sold separately include:
Among the firms that make Zune accessories are Microsoft, Altec Lansing, Belkin Corp., Digital Lifestyle Outfitters (DLO), Dual Electronics, Griffin Technology, Harman Kardon and JBL, Integrated Mobile Electronics, Jamo International, Klipsch Audio Technologies, Logitech, Monster Cable Products Inc., Speck, Targus Group International Inc. and VAF Research.[33]

Users often refer to on-device software as firmware, differing from the desktop media player as Zune software. Zune's operating system is based on Windows CE kernel for ARM architecture and uses a distribution like the Portable Media Center found on the Gigabeat S. Zune's native file compatible formats are
The graphical user interface (GUI) (called the "twist interface" by Microsoft) has sections for music, videos, pictures, social, radio, podcasts, marketplace, games and settings. It is said to provide "two-dimensional navigation" for scrolling through items with its directional pad.[34] In the music section, users can add songs to a quick playlist without reconnecting to the desktop software. In the picture section, the background can be personalized using any image stored on the device (for viewing) as wallpaper. In the radio section, users can receive and play FM radio internally, with North American, Japanese, and European tuning ranges and show song information on supported FM stations. In the social section, users can broadcast user profile and current activity to others nearby. In the setting section, users can control backlight settings and output analog TV in with purchase of a separate connection.
The first updates to the firmware added sharing features (send, community, list nearby Zune users) as described in FCC filings.[35]  [36] Firmware 1.1 allowed the device to inherit sharing capabilities described by codename Pyxis. Early firmware releases patched software bugs. About a year later, the much anticipated 2.2 firmware release added support for DVR-MS (Media Center Recorded TV) files, lossless playback, added wireless syncing, and GUI interface improvements.[citation needed]
Zune supports the Windows Media DRM (WMDRM) digital rights management system, which is not compatible with other DRM systems including Plays for Sure and is not part of the PlaysForSure platform or program.[37]  [38] Multimedia content is transferred through Media Transfer Protocol (MTP); however, its proprietary MTP extensions ("MTPZ") place an interoperability barrier between the Zune and previous MTP-based software.

The Zune software functions as management software for the device, a full media player application with a library, an interface to the Zune Marketplace, and as a media streaming server using Zune Network Sharing Service.[39]
The Zune device was designed to only work with the Zune software. The software synchronizes all content (music, videos, pictures, social, podcasts, and games) to the device doing any necessary transcoding for a file to play on the device.
As a media player, the Zune software supports the following formats — for audio: MP3 (.mp3), AAC (Low complexity) (.aac, .mp4, .m4a, .m4b, .mov), WMA (.wma); for video: MPEG4 (in .mp4, .m4v and .mov containers), H.264 (in .mp4, .m4v and .mov containers), WMV (.wmv), ASF (.asf); and for still images: JPEG (.jpg). It organizes the media in its library and allows users to add to the library by ripping from CDs and to organize the metadata. It can automa
