CableCARD
CableCARD is a plug-in card approximately the size of a credit card that allows consumers in the United States to view and record digital cable television channels on digital video recorders, personal computers and televisions without the use of other equipment such as a set top box (STB) provided by a cable television company. The card, provided by the local company for a nominal monthly fee, is a PCMCIA card and looks exactly like those used with laptops. In technical contexts, "CableCARD" refers more broadly to a set of technologies created by the United States cable television industry in response to requirements by federal government's Telecommunications Act of 1996 that cable companies allow non cable company provided devices to access their networks. Use of the term CableCARD can be confusing, because some technologies refer not to the physical card, but to a device ("Host") that uses the card. Some CableCARD technologies can be used with devices that have no physical CableCARDs.

The portion of the 1996 Telecom law which resulted in the creation of CableCARDs is known as Section 629, instructing the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to:
"...assure the commercial availability to consumers of multichannel video programming and other services offered over multichannel video programming systems, of converter boxes, interactive communications equipment, and other equipment used by consumers to access multichannel video programming and other services offered over multichannel video programming systems, from manufacturers, retailers, and other vendors not affiliated with any multichannel video programming distributor."
Multichannel video programming refers to cable or satellite television. A driving motivation of this passage was to foster the kind of consumer choices that resulted after the Federal government landmark Carterfone ruling requiring telephone companies to allow consumers to purchase third party telephones for attachment to the phone company network. The thought was that consumers would benefit from wider choices due to competition between consumer electronics (CE) manufacturers unaffiliated with cable companies.[1]
The FCC was charged with working with industry to carry out the directives of the 1996 law. On June 11, 1998, after securing proposals and recommendations from interested parties, the FCC ordered that cable companies would provide a separable security access device by July 1, 2000 which could be used by third-party devices to access digital cable networks.[2] One important issue was the concern that cable companies might not be motivated to provide efficient security access mechanisms for competitor companies to use. To address this, the FCC directed that the cable companies would by January 1, 2005 also have to use a separable access device that was also available to third parties. The cable company would be banned from providing devices that relied on a security access mechanism integrated with the device after the 2005 deadline. This rule is usually referred to as the "integration ban", and has been unsuccessfully challenged in the courts and in FCC petitions by the cable companies. The deadline has been shifted forward twice and went into effect July 1, 2007.[3]
The separable security device was referred to in FCC regulations as a "Point of Deployment" (POD) module. After many requests for delay from the cable industry, the first CableCARD devices became available from third party manufacturers in August 2004.
CableCARDs may be used to access both Standard Definition and High Definition channels (as long as they are not part of a Switched Digital Video system). CableCARDs are not necessary for viewing unscrambled digital cable channels if the user has a QAM tuner — a feature in some televisions and DVRs. CableCARD support is most common on higher end televisions that include a special slot for the CableCARD and a built-in cable tuner. The card acts like a unique "key" to unlock the channels and services to which the cable customer has subscribed, and the television's remote-control will also control the cable channels. Televisions that support CableCARD should be labeled by the manufacturer as "digital cable ready", or DCR.

Cable providers in the United States are required by the FCC to support the CableCARD standard. The specification for devices conforming to this standard is known as CableCARD 1.0, and allows access to all the features that consumers most commonly use, but cannot access services which require two-way communication with the cable company servers. The specification was developed by CableLabs, a research group run by a consortium of cable companies. Devices that use CableCARDs are known as "Hosts" and must be certified as compliant with the specification by CableLabs. The certification process can take significant amounts of time and is performed in batches on a regular cycle every 3 months.
Cable companies in the United States are required to provide CableCARDs conforming to this specification, and must correct incompatibilities between their networks and certified CableCARD devices.[4]
The current CableCARD standard was born out of an adversarial process between two main groups: cable companies represented by the National Cable & Telecommunications Association (NCTA) and consumer electronics companies represented by the Consumer Electronics Association (CEA). The portion of the CableCARD specs that could be agreed on describe how one-way services work, and so only this portion gained FCC support. Most of the remainder of the specs were swept into Cablelabs' proposal for the enhancement of the CableCARD standard known as CableCARD 2.0.
Although an optical cable service, Verizon FiOS is classified as a cable service and must by FCC rules also support the CableCARD standard. No cable providers in Canada currently support CableCARD. Video providers in Europe must conform to the DVB standard which is a more comprehensive open standard governed by independent standards bodies.
CableCARD also supports non-television functions. It can also act as a cable modem controller, again with the host providing modulation and demodulation functions, and the card providing decoding and IP routing functionality; however this feature is rarely used, and depends on the cable provider.

The physical CableCARD that is inserted into the host device is a PCMCIA type II card which handles decryption of video, and making sure that only people that have paid for the channel may view it. This is also known as "conditional access module" function.
There are two kinds of physical CableCARDs:
MCards are sometimes referred to as CableCARD 2.0 cards, although they do not themselves provide any of the CableCARD 2.0 features, such as interactivity. MCards are backward compatible with current CableCARD devices. To older CableCARD devices that do not support multiple streams, the card appears to be a single stream card. CE companies have long wanted MCards for their CableCARD 1.0 host devices in order to compete with Cable company devices that use multiple tuners. This is important for products such as Sony & TiVo CableCARD DVRs, televisions with picture-in-picture and CableCARD-equipped personal computers, which need to be able to record one show while the user is watching another. Without MCards, these products must rely on two SCards, and installation and support is more error-prone. Simple availability of MCards is insufficient if MCards are not supported on cable company servers by a specified date. No such date exists, and so CE companies are uncertain when they will be able to sell products that rely on MCards.
A common misconception is that there is a CableCARD 2.0 physical card that will provide two way services and will not be compatible with CableCARD 1.0 certified devices. This is not the case. CableCARD 2.0 host devices will only use either SCards or MCards that also work with CableCARD 1.0.
Interactive CableCARD 2.3 features rely on additional circuitry in the CableCARD Host device, not on the physical card. There is no directionality about the cards. This makes the name "CableCARD 2.0" extremely misleading, since it mostly has nothing to do with the physical CableCARDs.

As of January 2007, two manufacturers have M-Cards (multi-stream cards) qualified by CableLabs: Motorola and Scientific Atlanta (recently purchased by Cisco). Three manufacturers have S-Cards (single-stream cards) qualified: Motorola, Scientific Atlanta and NDS Group.

Two proposals exist for enhancing the CableCARD standard. Both are designed to add support for two-way features whose operation details the CE and cable company representatives could not agree on in time for inclusion in the CableCARD 1.0 specification. These two-way features include ordering pay-per-view via remote, Video On Demand, advanced electronic programming guide information, and Switched Video services. These features are not supported by CableCARD 1.0, and so are not available with current CableCARD-enabled products.
The CableCARD 2.0 proposal is a set of formal specifications advocated by the cable companies. The CableCARD 2.0 proposal does not specify a standard protocol for interacting with cable company servers, as is usually done with client-server architectures. Instead, the proposal specifies that the host machine provide a Java environment capable of running OCAP programs downloaded from the cable company. Cable companies generally advocate this position so that they can be sure that moneymaking interactive services may be reliably supported for each of the CE vendor machines without requiring each vendor to write custom software. CE vendors, on the other hand, argue the specification goes far beyond the requirement of a separable security device, and intrusively specifies the internal operations of their devices. This, they argue, turns their products into non unique commodities that no CE companies will be able to make profits on. Current CableCARD 2.0 negotiations remain at an impasse. Cable companies have said they will not be changing the specification substantively. Equipment with CableCARD 2.0 support is expected in 2007, since cable companies are going ahead without FCC approval and are commissioning Samsung, LG, and Panasonic to build devices to the specification.
CE and computer companies advocate a different proposal, which modifies the CableCARD 2.0 spec. This proposal was presented to the FCC on November 7, 2006, and has the goal of persuading the FCC to support a standard that aligns less with cable company interests. Specifically, they have advocated that OCAP be dropped as a requirement for simple interactive services such as Video on Demand, interactive television listings and pay-per-view. This proposal would require that some additional functionality be added to MCards with support on most servers available by January 1, 2008. Further, they have requested that consumers should "be allowed to save content to a DVR, to move content to a second or third TV, to a PC or to a portable device, subject only to the rules and limits set by the content provider and not subject to artificial and arbitrary limitations set by the cable operator." To this end, they have requested that the FCC order immediate changes to the CableCARD Host Licensing Agreement (CHILA) to accept all output protection technologies approved by Digital Living Network Alliance (DLNA). Another proposal would streamline the CableLabs certification process into a standardized test suite, so that CE companies could self-certify devices without waiting for CableLabs approval.[5]
A portion of the CableCARD 2.0 proposals that will be available prior to approval of the remainder of the specification regards the multistream cards (MCards). Some DVR manufacturers are postponing the integration of CableCARD slots into their machines until after MCards are available. Others, such as Sony, TiVo and Microsoft bypassed the MCard delays and record two channels by using two SCards. MCards are expected in the spring of 2007.


Some cable companies state that they will support CableCARD 2.0 when the equipment becomes available. It is thought that many cable companies do not intend to put features such as OCAP in lower end STBs. There are some in the cable industry who are advocating that physical CableCARDs be dropped entirely. These cable companies prefer to move away from physical cards, and have proposed that a downloadable security component known as Downloadable Conditional Access System (DCAS) be used instead. As for cable company advanced proposals, neither CableCARD 2.0 nor DCAS has been approved by the FCC, and what form they will eventually take is a matter of considerable debate and speculation.
CE companies advocate their proposal for more unfettered access to cable company networks, with CableLabs' role reduced to addressing only cable company interests of maintaining network stability and security.
CableLabs and TiVo have announced access to switched digital cable channels via TiVo. "Switched digital allows cable operators to transmit channels to customers on an as-needed basis, and it provides cable operators more flexibility to deliver the interactive digital services, high- definition (HD) channels, broadband Internet and digital phone service that consumers are craving".[4]

CableCARD is a term trademarked by CableLabs for the Point of Deployment (POD) module defined by standards including SCTE 28, SCTE 41, CEA-679 and others. The CableCARD is physically a PCMCIA type II PC card, supplied by the cable company, which is inserted into a slot in the host (typically a digital television set or a set-top box) in order to identify and authorize the customer, and to provide proprietary decoding of the encrypted digital cable signal without the need for a set-top box. The cable tuner and QAM demodulator themselves are part of the host device, as is the MPEG decoder. The role of the card is to perform any conditional access and decryption functions. This results in an MPEG-2 transport stream, which is decoded by the host. The card also receives messages sent over the out-of-band signaling channel by the cable company's Head end servers and forwards them to the host.
Cards from major providers such as Comcast, Cox Communications, RCN and Time Warner Cable in some regions currently require on-site installation by a technician, who reports the unique ID numbers pre-assigned to both the CableCARD and the digital television to the company headquarters, where they are updated to the customer's account. Because of this, CableCARDs cannot be moved from one device to another without a visit from a cable company installer. Some regions (such as Comcast Houston) do allow customer installs, and actually provide special phone support for CableCARDs. The card is inserted as users do for laptop PCMCIA cards. The CableCARD identification numbers are given to the operator who then sends the CableCARD an out of band Entitlement Management Message (EMM), which remotely programs the CableCARD, authorizing it to decode for the specific host only those shows and services which the user is authorized to view. [5] [6] [7]
CableCARDs with personal computers:
Existing integrated cable set-top boxes perform four basic functions:
New digital televisions and other devices that are labeled DCR (Digital cable ready) contain:
The CableCARD 2.0 specification proposed by cable companies includes support for #1-4, interactive two-way communications; however it is unknown exactly when CableCARD 2.0 hosts and compatible servers will become available (possibly late 2008 or 2009 in some cities). Future devices which support CableCARD 2.0 are expected to be labeled iDCR "Interactive digital cable ready". Among other requirements, CableCARD 2.0 hosts will be required to provide the OpenCable Application Platform (OCAP), also known as Tru2Way, to run programs downloaded from the cable company.
An alternative to CableCARD 2.0, most recently advocated by the U.S. cable television industry, uses Downloadable Conditional Access System (DCAS) in place of physical CableCARDs. In this proposal, a custom security chip must be soldered into every compliant host; if a security scheme is compromised, a new security program can be downloaded to the host device.
Because the conditional access system is in software, it can be sent with the video as a form of Digital Rights Management (DRM). The CableCARD Host Licensing Agreement (CHILA) and the DCAS agreement restrict the technologies that CE companies may use for distributing video from host devices. CE companies object to this expanding the notion of CableCARD network security issues to also include content protection issues. They prefer to deal with content owners directly with their standards and regard cable company protocols and formats as a transport only. CE companies wish to communicate video inside the home network using their own protected protocols and formats.

