Jedi
The Jedi are members of a fictional monastic non-theistic order, referred to as the Holy Order of the Jedi Knights in the Star Wars galaxy created by George Lucas. They are an ancient monastic peacekeeping organization known for their observance of The Force,[1] specifically the "light side" of the force, and the rejection of the "dark side" of the Force, as well as the dark side's adherents, the Sith.
They were named after the jidaigeki genre of Japanese films.[2]

The Jedi were initially formed at approximately the same time as the Old Republic, 25,000 years before the time frame of the movies.
However, soon after its formation, several Jedi left the order to follow the path of the Dark Side, the first of many schisms.


The Jedi Order was ruled by a board of 12 members called Jedi Council which was located on the planet of Coruscant during the prequel trilogy. The council represented a gathering of great minds which acted as a governing body for the order as well as a martial advisory board for the Old Republic Senate.
During the original trilogy, the Council no longer exists, as most of its members had either perished during Order 66 in Episode III, or went into exile to escape persecution from the Empire.

Within the Expanded Universe of Star Wars media, the primary Jedi Council on Coruscant is the main, but not the only, Jedi governing body. At one point approximately 4,000 years prior to the movies, there was also a Jedi council on Dantooine. After the movies, Luke Skywalker eventually reestablished the Jedi Order and creates something called the Masters' Council.
During times of great danger, the Jedi also engaged in direct democracy through massive gatherings known as conclaves in order to discuss the issues at hand and come to a collective conclusion on their way to solve those issues.
The Sith can trace their roots back from heretical Jedi who followed the path of the Dark Side towards the homeworld of the Sith race.
This Sith Empire invaded the Old Republic 5,000 years before the movie in what was known as the Great Hyperspace War.
Over time, the Dark Jedi and the Sith intermingled until eventually the word Sith stopped referring to the race but rather the ideology of the Dark Jedi, and the Sith began to come from various races and planets united by the goal of eradicating the Jedi and the pursuit of power through the Dark Side.

Within the Star Wars universe, the Jedi are usually portrayed as dressed in simple robes and carrying specialized field gear for their missions. The most notable instrument wielded by a Jedi is the lightsaber.
Lightsabers are used by both Jedi and Sith. Jedi commonly wielded blue and green lightsabers in the movies, while the Sith tended to wield red ones. Jedi Mace Windu (Samuel L. Jackson) wielded a unique purple lightsaber.
In the Expanded Universe of Star Wars media, there were a vast variety of lightsaber colors. In Knights Of The Old Republic, the colors signified the Jedi's specialization.

Members of the order progressed through four to six tiers of rank, at times referred to as levels.


The Jedi hold a religious reverence to The Force, approached through meditation, civic service and learning similar to that of Buddhist monks, particularly those of the Shaolin Monastery.

One of the enduring influences the Star Wars saga has had is the idea of the fictional Jedi values being interpreted in a modern philosophical path or religion.[3] Over half a million people throughout the world declared themselves as Jedi on their census forms, which was considered to be a practical joke and may not reflect the real number of Jedi in the countries concerned.



