List of sexually active popes
This is a list of sexually active popes, list of priests who were sexually active before becoming pope and popes who were legally married, who belonged to the Catholic Church. Some candidates were sexually active before their election as pope, and it has sometimes been claimed that other Popes were sexually active during their papacies. Since such relationships were sometimes undertaken outside of the bonds of matrimony, and because sometimes the Pope was under a vow of celibacy, the Catholic Church considers these to be grave abuses and causes of scandal. However, it does not undermine the Catholic doctrines considering the authority and succession of the Papacy from Saint Peter the Apostle.

Since the Middle Ages, the Latin (Western) rite of the Catholic Church has required priest and bishops to be celibate.[1] Previously, celibacy was not absolutely required for those ordained, but still was a discipline practiced in the early Church. In this context, celibate is not synonymous with sexually abstinent; it means not married and only entails sexual abstinence because a different Catholic doctrine requires sexual abstinence outside marriage.
The discipline of priestly celibacy is not considered one of the infallible immutable dogmas, but Catholic doctrine does say that virginity and celibacy, lived out as abstinence, are higher than marriage, following the Letters of Paul of Tarsus and confirmed by a dogma in the Council of Trent.
In some cases a married Protestant minister who converts to Catholicism may be ordained to the priesthood. Present-day canon law allows the College of Cardinals to elect a married man to the papacy. In the Eastern Catholic Churches, married men are routinely ordained to the priesthood, but not to the episcopate. According to the Gospels, Saint Peter, Whom the Catholic Church maintains as the founder, bishop and first Pope of the Christian community in Rome, was married, and several other Popes have also been married.

There have been 265 popes. There are various classifications for those who were sexually active at some time during their life. Periods in parentheses refer to the years of their papacies.

It was within canon law, and still is, for priests to have once been married before receiving Holy Orders. In the Eastern Rite branches of the Catholic Church, it is within canon law to be a priest and married.




Along with other complaints, the activities of the popes between 1458 to 1565, helped encourage the Protestant Revolt.

There have been forty-one popes since 1565. None of them is known to have been sexually active during their papacy.



