Chav
Chav, Chava or Charva or Charver is a derogatory term applied to certain young people in the United Kingdom. The stereotypical image of a chav is a white aggressive teen or young adult, of working class background, who wears branded sports and casual clothing, who often fights and engages in petty criminality, and is often assumed to be unemployed or in a low paid job. The term may originate from the Romani language.[1] [2]. In its English form, the term is generally derogative, and has appeared in mainstream dictionaries in 2005.[3][4]
The term chav has many regional alternatives; its North East England variant charva or charv, used in Tyne and Wear. Charver was a common word of wide but not all-embracing popularity in Newcastle throughout the latter half of the 19th century, synonymous with lad or kid, and derivative of chawvo, a Romany expression meaning "a young person, a friend". During the 1990s, charver underwent a semantic disfigurement, and massive growth in usage within speakers of Geordie and some related dialects. Its shift in meaning was towards that of an insult; at this point charver and chav became synonyms, although the latter was yet to enter common parlance. It is likely that the term chav is a recent derivative of charver, but also possible that the two words are entirely etymologically distinct.[5][6][7] Other equivalents to chav include scally, prevalent in north-west England (particularly Liverpool) and townie, a word now seemingly enveloped by chav. Similar words in use outside England include ned or scunner in Scotland, spide or skanger in Ireland, and spide, milly (from Mill-girl) and skeet in Northern Ireland.
Response to the term has ranged from amusement to criticism that it is a new manifestation of classism.[8] One BBC TV documentary suggested that chav is an evolution of previous working-class youth subcultures associated with particular commercial clothing styles, such as mods, skinheads and casuals[9]. However, chav is not a straight synonym for "working class person"; it refers to a specific mode of behaviour, dress and speech that is far from universal amongst the British working class.[citation needed]). The term has been associated with juvenile delinquency, the ASBO Generation and yob culture.

From its origins as a slang term, use of the word spread so rapidly that by 2004 it had become a hugely popular word in national newspapers and common parlance in the UK. Susie Dent's Larpers and Shroomers: The Language Report, published by the Oxford University Press, designated it as the "word of the year"[10] in 2004.[11] A survey in 2005 found that in December 2004 alone 114 British newspaper articles used the word. The popularity of the word has led to the creation of sites devoted to cataloguing and mocking the "chav" lifestyle.
The "chav culture" has been portrayed extensively in British media:

The widespread use of the chav stereotype has come under criticism; some argue[20] that it amounts simply to snobbery and elitism,[8] and that serious social problems such as Anti-Social Behaviour Orders, teenage pregnancy, delinquency and alcoholism in low-income areas should not be scoffed at. Critics of the term have argued that its proponents are “neo-snobs,”[21] and that its increasing popularity raises questions about how British society deals with social mobility and class.[17] In a February 2005 article in The Times, Julie Burchill argued that use of the word is a form of “social racism,” and that such “sneering” reveals more about the shortcomings of the “chav-haters” than those of their supposed victims.[22] The writer John Harris argued along similar lines in a 2007 article in The Guardian.[23]


The same Romany word appears to have transferred to the Nonantum, Massachusetts dialect as "chabby," though without the negative connotations of "chav," according to a 2001 Boston Globe article.[30]


