AnyDVD
AnyDVD is a Microsoft Windows driver allowing decryption of DVDs on-the-fly, as well as targeted removal of copy preventions and user operation prohibitions (UOPs). With an upgrade, it will also do the same for HD DVD and Blu-ray. The AnyDVD program runs in the background, making discs unrestricted and region-free. In addition to removing digital restrictions, AnyDVD will also defeat Macrovision analog copy prevention. Analog prevention distorts the video signal to prevent high quality copying from the output. AnyDVD is also able to remove copy-prevention from audio CDs.
As of version 6.1.4.3, AnyDVD has a revised ripper that removes Sony ARccOS, Macrovision RipGuard, and other structural preventions and repairs both intentional and unintentional mastering errors. It ensures strict compliance with third-party tools, particularly DVD Shrink and Nero Recode.
The ripper module is based on code from Elby's CloneDVD. Previous versions used a ripper based on FixVTS, but FixVTS was recently shut down by legal threats from Sony.

On February 17, 2007, SlySoft released AnyDVD HD. The program comes with the same functionality as AnyDVD, but with additional features for full HD DVD support, including decryption of AACS encrypted HD DVD movie discs. Support for AACS encryption and Region Code removal from Blu-ray Discs was added in version 6.1.3.0, released March 5, 2007.
Besides dealing with DVD copying issues, AnyDVD also has the ability to sit in the background and automatically detect and remove additional data sessions contained on Audio CDs which contain copy-prevention measures. This allows for the actual audio tracks to be directly accessed on the system for direct playback and for access by CD extraction software. Intentional tracking errors in the audio may also be discovered, for example, that involved with key2AudioXS, which generally cause major skipping distortions to be introduced into the ripped audio tracks, even where additional data sessions have been ignored. AnyDVD can also bypass these methods such that clean, distortion-free playback and ripping can occur.
On March 19, 2008, SlySoft released version 6.4.0.0 of AnyDVD HD, which removes BD+ as well.[1] Some Blu-ray software players have removed the ability of movie playback from folders on a hard drive. AnyDVD HD has since included the ability to rip movies to an ISO format.

AnyDVD is outlawed in Germany, as it removes copy prevention from DVDs. The Heise news portal was sued by the record industry for linking to SlySoft's website in a news report. The publisher subsequently counter sued with claims of violation of their constitutionally guaranteed freedom of the press and has as of April 2007 lost two appeal proceedings. The German Federal Constitutional Court has decided not to rule on Heise's appeal for the time being because remedies in the ordinary courts had not been exhausted.[2] The legal status of AnyDVD in other countries is unclear.



