Shinto
Shinto (神道 ,Shintō?) is the former state religion of Japan and remains the most common name for the nation's non-Buddhist ethnic religious practices. It was formed from disparate local mythologies, beginning with the Kojiki of 712, into an imperial religion called State Shinto that solidified in the Meiji period. Shinto is characterized by polytheism and animism, and involves the worship of kami (神 ?), or spirits. Most kami are local and can be regarded as the spiritual being/spirit or genius of a particular place, but some hold a more universal roles. For example; Amaterasu is officially worshiped at the Ise Shrine but is also the focus of many sectors throughout the country.
The earliest Japanese thoughts do not refer to a unified religion. The word Shinto was borrowed from the Chinese (神道),[1] combining two kanji: "shin" (神 ?), meaning gods or spirits (originally from the Chinese word shen); and "tō" (道 ?), meaning a philosophical path or study (originally from the Chinese word tao). As such, Shinto is commonly translated as "The Way of the Gods." Modern Shinto is the result of a centuries-old syncretism with Buddhism, the legacy of which continues on despite a forced separation by the Meiji government.
While some Shinto practices and teachings were given a great deal of confidence during World War II, they are no longer taught or practiced today. There are others, though, that still exist as commonplace activities, such as omikuji (a form of fortune-telling) and the Japanese New Year to which few people give religious connotations. Important national ceremonies such as coronations and imperial marriages are conducted at the Three Palace Sanctuaries in Tokyo.

Shinto can be seen as a form of animism and may be regarded as a variant of shamanist religion. The afterlife is not a primary concern in Shinto; much more emphasis is placed on fitting into this world, instead of preparing for the next.
Shinto has no binding set of dogma, no holiest place for worshipers, no person or kami deemed holiest, and no defined set of prayers. Instead, Shinto is a collection of rituals and methods meant to mediate the relations of living humans and kami. Conversely, Shinto had and continues to have an impact on the practice of other religions within Japan. In particular, one could even make a case for discussing it under the heading of Japanese Buddhism, since these two religions have exercised a profound influence on each other throughout Japanese history.[2] Further, the Japanese "New Religions" that have emerged since the end of the Second World War have also shown a clear Shinto influence.
Shinto was used as a state ideology during the militaristic beginning of the Shōwa period, following the Meiji Restoration. Whether this was because its lack of absolute authority allowed it to be hijacked by radical nationalists, who desired to unify the Japanese people against the "inferior" people in other nations, or was an inevitable outcome of the emphasis Shinto places on Japanese exceptionalism has been much debated. Even today, some far right factions within Japanese society want to see a greater emphasis placed on Shinto and increased reverence shown to the Emperor as part of a project to restore Japan to its "rightful place" as the leading nation of the world.

The most immediately striking theme in the Shinto religion is a great love and reverence for nature. Thus, a waterfall, the moon, or just an oddly shaped rock might come to be regarded as a kami; so might charismatic persons or more abstract entities like growth and fertility. As time went by, the original nature-worshipping roots of the religion, while never lost entirely, became attenuated and the kami took on more reified and anthropomorphic forms, with a formidable body of myth attached to them. (See also: Japanese mythology.) The kami, however, are not transcendent deities in the usual Western and Indian sense of the word. Although divine, they are close to humanity; they inhabit the same world as we do, make the same mistakes as we do, and feel and think the same way as we do. The deceased will usually become kami, with their power and main characteristics given by their doings in life. Those believing other religions may be also venerated as kami after death, if there are Shinto believers who wish them to be.


Though Shinto has no absolute commandments for its adherents outside of living "a simple and harmonious life with nature and people", there are said to be "Four Affirmations" of the Shinto spirit:

Shinto shows that everything has a kami (神 ,"spiritual essence"?, commonly translated as god or spirit). Every rock, every squirrel, every living and nonliving thing contains a kami. There is also a main kami for groups of things: for example, there is a kami within a rhinoceros, and there is also a main kami residing over all the rhinos of the world.
Shinto's spirits are collectively called yaoyorozu no kami (八百万の神 ?), an expression literally meaning "eight million kami", but interpreted as meaning "myriad", although it can be translated as "many kami".
The most worshipped of all kami is the sun-goddess Amaterasu. However, Japanese do not exactly praise her or say her name to ask for help. Her main shrine is the Ise Shrine, but many lesser shrines are dedicated to her. Within the shrine, she is often symbolized by a mirror. Alternatively, the inner sanctum may be empty. This emptiness does not mean non-existence; rather, it symbolizes that everything that one sees through the mirror is the embodiment of Amaterasu and every other kami. Shinto shrines were once thought to be used as a gate way to other worlds.
Until the end of World War II, the Tenno (Emperor) was believed to have been descended from Amaterasu and father of all Japanese, and was therefore a kami on earth (an ikigami or "living kami"); this divine status was popularized during the Meiji Restoration. This did not prevent military governors (Shogun) from usurping power, but the emperor was always seen as the true ruler of Japan, even when his rule was only nominal. Although Emperor Hirohito renounced his divine status in 1946 under American pressure (Ningen-sengen), the imperial family remains deeply involved in the Shinto ritual that unifies the Japanese nation symbolically. Because Shinto does not require a declaration or an enforcement to be worshiped (considered "unharmonious"), this declaration, while serving political reasons, is religiously meaningless and merely means that the state enforcement has ended.

Shinto teaches that certain deeds create a kind of ritual impurity that one should want cleansed for one's own peace of mind and good fortune, not because impurity is wrong in and of itself. Wrong deeds are called "impurity" (穢れ ,kegare?), opposed to "purity" (清め ,kiyome?). Normal days are called "day" (ke), and festive days are called "sunny" or simply "good" (hare).[3] Killing living beings should be done with reverence for taking a life to continue one's own and should be kept to a minimum.
Modern Japanese continue to place great emphasis on the importance of ritual phrases and greetings (挨拶 ,aisatsu?). Before eating, many (though not all) Japanese say, "I will humbly receive" (戴きます ,itadakimasu?), to show proper thankfulness to the preparer of the meal in particular and more generally to all those living things that lost their lives to make the meal. Failure to show proper respect can be seen as a lack of concern for others, looked down on because it is believed to create problems for all. Those who fail to take into account the feelings of other people and kami will only bring ruin on themselves.
The worst expression of such an attitude is the taking of another's life for personal advancement or enjoyment. Those killed without being shown gratitude for their sacrifice will hold a grudge (怨み ,urami?) and become a powerful and evil kami that seeks revenge (aragami). This same emphasis on the need for cooperation and collaboration can be seen throughout Japanese culture today. Additionally, if anyone is injured on the grounds of a shrine, the area affected must be ritually purified.

Purification rites are a vital part of Shinto. These may serve to placate any restive kami, for instance when their shrine had to be relocated. Such ceremonies have also been adapted to modern life. For example, a ceremony was held in 1969 to hallow the Apollo 11 mission to the moon,[4] new buildings made in Japan are frequently blessed by a Shinto priest kannushi (神主 ?) during the groundbreaking ceremony, and many cars made in Japan have been blessed as part of the assembly process. Moreover, every Japanese car factory built outside Japan has had a groundbreaking ceremony performed by a Shinto priest, with occasionally an annual visitation by the priest to re-purify.
A more personal purification rite is the purification by water. This may involve standing beneath a waterfall or performing ritual ablutions in a river-mouth or in the sea (misogi). This practice comes from Shinto history, when the kami Izanagi-no-Mikoto first performed misogi after returning from the land of Yomi, where he was made impure by Izanami-no-Mikoto after her death. These two forms of purification are often referred to as harae (祓).
A third form of purification is avoidance, that is, the taboo placed on certain persons or acts. To illustrate, women were not allowed to climb Mount Fuji until 1868, in the era of the Meiji Restoration. Although this aspect has decreased in recent years, religious Japanese will not use an inauspicious word like "cut" at a wedding, nor will they attend a wedding if they have recently been bereaved.

Unlike many religions, one does not need to publicly profess belief in Shinto to be a Shintoist. Whenever a child is born in Japan, a local Shinto shrine adds the child's name to a list kept at the shrine and declares him or her a "family child" (氏子 ,ujiko?). After death an ujiko becomes a "family spirit", or "family kami" (氏神 ,ujigami?). One may choose to have one's name added to another list when moving and then be listed at both places. Names can be added to the list without consent and regardless of the beliefs of the person added to the list. However, this is not considered an imposition of belief, but a sign of being welcomed by the local kami, with the promise of addition to the pantheon of kami after death. Those children who die before addition to the list are called "water children" (水子 ,mizuko?), and are believed to cause troubles and plagues. Mizuko are often worshipped in a Shinto shrine dedicated to stilling their anger and sadness, called mizuko kuyō (水子供養).
Because Shinto has co-existed with Buddhism for well over a millennium, it is very difficult to untangle Shinto and Buddhist beliefs about the world. Though Buddhism and Shinto have very different perspectives on the world, most Japanese do not see any challenge in reconciling these two very different religions[citation needed], and practice both. Thus it is common for people to practice Shinto in life yet have a Buddhist funeral. Their different perspectives on the afterlife are seen as complementing each other, and frequently the ritual practice of one will have an origin in the other.

There is no core sacred text in Shinto, as the Bible is in Christianity or Qur'an is in Islam. Instead there are books of mythology and history which provide stories and background to many of the most well-known kami.


The principal worship of kami is done at public shrines (jinja), although home worship at small private shrines (kamidana) (sometimes only a high shelf with a f
