Gordon Ramsay
Boxwood Café
Maze
Pétrus 
Banquette
Verre
Gordon Ramsay au Trianon Palace, Versailles
Gordon Ramsay at Conrad Tokyo
Gordon Ramsay at Powerscourt
Cerise by Gordon Ramsay
Gordon Ramsay at The London
La Noisette
The Narrow
The Devonshire
Beyond Boiling Point
Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares
Hell's Kitchen (UK)
Hell's Kitchen (US)
The F-Word
Kitchen Nightmares
Gordon James Ramsay, OBE, (born 8 November 1966) is a British chef, television personality and restaurateur.[1] He has been awarded a total of 16 Michelin Stars,[2][3][4] and in 2007 became one of only three chefs in the United Kingdom to hold three Michelin stars at one time.[5] Ramsay currently ranks 3rd in the world in terms of Michelin Stars behind Joël Robuchon and Alain Ducasse.[6][dead link]
Ramsay is known for presenting TV programmes about competitive cookery and food, such as Hell's Kitchen and The F-Word and Ramsay's Kitchen Nightmares.

Ramsay's father was, at various times, a swimming pool manager, welder, shopkeeper, and aspiring country and western singer, and his mother and sister were nurses.[7] Ramsay has described his early life as "hopelessly itinerant", as his family moved constantly due to the aspirations and failures of his father. In 1976, they finally settled in Stratford-upon-Avon where he grew up with an allotment nearby. In past public interviews, Ramsay has declined to describe his father as an alcoholic; however, his autobiography, Humble Pie,[7] describes his early life as being marked by abuse and negligence from this "hard-drinking womanizer".[7][8] At the age of 16, Ramsay moved out of the family house and shifter in with his scout master, Harold Hardbottom, to a council flat in Banbury[9] with his elder sister.
Ramsay played football, was first chosen to play under-14 football at age 12, and was chosen to play for Warwickshire at age 12. His football career was marked by a number of injuries, causing him to remark later in life, "Perhaps I was doomed when it came to football".[7] In mid-1984, Ramsay had a trial with Rangers F.C., the club he supported as a boy. He seriously injured his knee, smashing the cartilage during training. [10] Ramsay continued to train and play on the injured knee, tearing a cruciate ligament during a squash game. He never fully recovered from the double injury. Rangers told him that he may be signed, however his personal coach Harold was not appreciated by the club heirarchy and suggested that he could sign with a club in a lower division. Ramsay claimed to have played two first-team games for Rangers;[11] and to have been signed by the club at the age of 15 [12] He also claims he was scouted by Rangers when playing for the Oxford United in the FA Youth Cup. Such claims have been proved false, as there is no record of Ramsay playing for Oxford United and the fixture in question did not even take place [13] Similarly, Ramsay's name has never appeared on Rangers team sheet, and the manager who Ramsay blames for ending his career was at a completely different club at the time.[14] A spokesperson for Ramsay suggested that any inaccuracies about his recollection of his footballing career were due to the passage of time.[15]
By this time, Ramsay's interest in cooking had already begun, and rather than be known as "the football player with the gammy knee",[7] at age 19, Ramsay paid more serious attention to his culinary education. After weighing his options, without enough O levels to join either the Royal Navy or the police force, Ramsay enrolled at a local college, sponsored by the Rotarians to study Hotel Management. He describes his decision to enter catering college as "an accident, a complete accident".[7] In September 2005, Ramsay expressed an interest in moving into football again as an owner with the proposed takeover of Greenock Morton football club.[16]
In the late 1980s, he worked as a commis chef at the Wroxton House Hotel, then ran the kitchen and 60-seat dining room at the Wickham Arms, until his relationship with the owner's wife made the situation difficult.[7] Ramsay then moved to London, where he worked in a series of restaurants until being inspired to work for the temperamental Marco Pierre White at Harveys.[7]
After working at Harveys for two years and ten months, Ramsay, tired of "the rages and the bullying and violence", decided that the way to further advance his career was to study French cuisine. White discouraged Ramsay from taking a job in Paris, instead encouraging him to work for Albert Roux at Le Gavroche in Mayfair. (While at Le Gavroche, he met Jean-Claude Breton, now his maître d' at Royal Hospital Road.) After working at Le Gavroche for a year, Albert Roux invited Ramsay to work with him at Hotel Diva, a ski resort in the French Alps, as his number two. From there, Ramsay moved to Paris to work with Guy Savoy and Joël Robuchon, both Michelin-starred chefs. He continued his training in France for three years, before giving in to the physical and mental stress of the kitchens and taking a year to work as a personal chef on the private yacht Idlewild, based in Bermuda.[7]

Upon his return to London in 1993, Ramsay was offered the position of head chef at La Tante Claire in Chelsea. Shortly thereafter, Marco White re-entered his life, offering to set him up with a head chef position and 10% share in the Rossmore, owned by White's business partners. The restaurant was renamed Aubergine and went on to win its first Michelin star fourteen months later. In 1997, Aubergine won its second Michelin star. Despite the restaurant's success, a dispute with Ramsay's business owners and Ramsay's dream of running his own restaurant led to his leaving the partnership in 1997.[7] In 1998, Ramsay opened his own restaurant in Chelsea, Gordon Ramsay at Royal Hospital Road, with the help of his father-in-law, Chris Hutcheson. The restaurant gained its third Michelin star in 2001, making Ramsay the first Scot to achieve that feat.[17]
From his first restaurant, Ramsay's empire has expanded rapidly, first opening Petrus, where six bankers famously spent over £44,000 on wine during a single meal in 2001,[18] then Amaryllis in Glasgow (which he was later forced to close) and later Gordon Ramsay at Claridge's. Restaurants at the Dubai Creek and Connaught Hotels followed, the latter branded with his protégée, Angela Hartnett's, name. Ramsay has now begun opening restaurants outside the UK, beginning with Verre in Dubai. Gordon Ramsay at Conrad Tokyo and Cerise by Gordon Ramsay both opened in Tokyo in 2005, and in November, 2006, Gordon Ramsay at the London opened in New York City,[19] winning top newcomer in the city’s coveted Zagat guide, despite mixed reviews from professional critics.[20]
In 2007, Ramsay opened his first Irish restaurant; Gordon Ramsay at Powerscourt opened at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Powerscourt, Co. Wicklow, Ireland.[21]
In May 2008 Ramsay opened his first west coast restaurant, in Los Angeles, California. Situated in the former Bel-Age hotel on the Sunset Strip in Hollywood, the hotel has recently been renovated and re-named the London West Hollywood. As with his New York City establishment, the restaurant will be called Gordon Ramsay at the London West Hollywood. Many episodes of Ramsay's US series Hell's Kitchen are recorded in southern California, which has generated a great deal of notoriety for Gordon Ramsay.[citation needed]

Ramsay is one of only three chefs in the UK to maintain three Michelin Stars for his restaurant (the others being Heston Blumenthal and Alain Roux). He was appointed OBE in the 2006 honours list "for services to the hospitality industry".
In July 2006 Ramsay won the Catey award for "Independent Restaurateur of the Year", becoming only the third person to have won three Catey awards, the biggest awards of the UK hospitality industry. Ramsay's two previous Catey awards were in 1995 (Newcomer of the Year) & 2000 (Chef of the Year). The other two triple-winners are Michel Roux and Andrew and Jacquie Pern.
In September 2006, he was named as the most influential person in the UK hospitality industry in the annual Caterersearch 100 list, published by Caterer and Hotelkeeper magazine. He overtook Jamie Oliver, who had been top of the list in 2005.[22]
Also in 2006, Ramsay was nominated as a candidate for Rector at the University of St Andrews, but was beaten at the polls by Simon Pepper.[23] Despite a publicity campaign, Ramsay never visited St Andrews and did not appear in press interviews.
Ramsay's flagship restaurant, Restaurant Gordon Ramsay, was voted London's top restaurant in food bible Harden's for eight years, but in 2008 was placed below Petrus, a restaurant run by his former protégé Marcus Wareing.[24]

All of Ramsay's business interests (restaurants, media, consultancy) are held in the company Gordon Ramsay Holdings Limited. Run in partnership with his father-in-law Chris Hutcheson, Ramsay owns a 69% stake valued at £67m.[25]
Whereas previous ventures acted as a combined consultant/brand, in November 2006 Ramsay announced plans to create three restaurants in the United States in partnership with private equity group Blackstone Group, who are refurbishing each of the chosen hotels into five star locations at a cost of £100M per hotel. At an investment of £3m per restaurant for the 10-year lease, all the restaurants will offer the chef’s trademark modern European cuisine, and opened in 2006/2007 at:
In late 2006 Gordon Ramsay Holdings purchased three London pubs; The Narrow in Limehouse, which opened in March 2007, the Devonshire in Chiswick, which opened in October of that year and The Warrington in Maida Vale, which opened in February 2008.
Ramsay acts as a consultant to numerous catering organizations, and was recruited by Singapore Airlines as one of its "International Culinary Panel" consultants.[26]
In May 2008 it was confirmed that Ramsay's protégé of 15 years, Marcus Wareing was going solo having opened and operated Pétrus at The Berkeley Hotel on behalf of Gordon Ramsay Holdings since 2003.[27] With the name Pétrus owned by Gordon Ramsay Holdings, industry sources suggested it was likely to transfer to another restaurant in the group with the former La Noisette site identified as the most likely.[28]

Ramsay's first foray in television was in two fly-on-the-kitchen-wall documentaries: Boiling Point (1998) and Beyond Boiling Point (2000).
In 2004, Ramsay appeared in two British television series. Ramsay's K
