Baroque pop
Baroque pop is a style of pop music originated in the mid 1960s that brought elements of classical music into the writing and recording of rock 'n' roll songs.[1] The Left Banke, The Beach Boys, Phil Spector, and Burt Bacharach are cited as some of this subgenre's pioneers.[1] Practitioners of the style utilized instrumentation not traditional to rock such as harpsichord, oboe, cello, or french horn. Baroque pop's highest popularity occurred before the introduction of the synthesizer or sampler, so "real" instruments are heard on the recordings, played by session musicians. Baroque pop may be distinguished from progressive rock which uses classical instrumentation by its generally simpler song structures closer to standard pop songwriting, and also by its more mainstream lyrical content as opposed to the more conceptual lyrics associated with prog. Baroque pop is similar to sunshine pop in subject matter, but with a more melodramatic and "darker" edge.
The use of the word "Baroque" is essentially a coverall term; Baroque music most closely refers to the music of Europe approximately between the years 1600 and 1750, with some of its most prominent composers including J. S. Bach and Antonio Vivaldi.[2] Much of the instrumentation of baroque pop is more akin to that of the Classical period, chronologically defined as the period of European music from 1750 to 1820 (after Baroque music and before Romantic music) and stylistically defined by balanced phrases, clarity and beauty, using similar instrumentation to modern orchestras.[3] Just as "classical" has become a term used to describe all music that cannot otherwise be defined as "popular", it seems that baroque pop is a stylistic term that does not necessarily reflect the sonic qualities of the genre.

The Beach Boys' Pet Sounds is considered an album important to this genre. Much of the later work of Phil Spector, who greatly influenced Brian Wilson's production style, is considered baroque pop as well. Scott Walker is another important figure in the genre. The Beatles' "Yesterday" recorded in 1965 is an early example of baroque pop.
Others artists include:

Modern baroque pop, characterized by an infusion of orchestral arrangements or classical style composition generally within an indie or indie pop setting, is also often referred to as chamber pop or chamber rock.[1][7] This style, with clear indie-rock inclinations, uses additional members on in the band to create a fuller-bodied, more orchestral sound. Sometimes traditional pop instrumentation is discarded entirely. Many artists often highlight songs with unique instruments not found in most modern popular music such as the accordion or harpsichord. The writing style of the genre often has a distinct narrative quality to it and often makes references to history, literature, philosophy, and folklore.
Many baroque pop artists of the past two decades include artists that are classified under several different genres including indie rock, alternative rock, folk, Americana, Britpop, psychedelic, and dream pop. Baroque pop displays much in common with post-rock[citation needed] but is generally more mainstream and less experimental.



