Field (mathematics)
In abstract algebra, a field is an algebraic structure with notions of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, satisfying certain axioms. The most commonly used fields are the field of real numbers, the field of complex numbers, and the field of rational numbers, but there are also finite fields, fields of functions, various algebraic number fields, p-adic fields, and so forth.
Any field may be used as the scalars for a vector space, which is the standard general context for linear algebra. The theory of field extensions (including Galois theory) involves the roots of polynomials with coefficients in a field; among other results, this theory leads to impossibility proofs for the classical problems of angle trisection and squaring the circle with a compass and straightedge, as well as a proof of the Abel–Ruffini theorem on the insolubility of quintic equations. In modern mathematics, the theory of fields (or field theory) plays an essential role in number theory and algebraic geometry.
As an algebraic structure, every field is a ring, but not every ring is a field. The most important difference is that fields allow for division (though not division by zero), while a ring may not possess multiplicative inverses. In addition, the multiplication operation in a field is required to be commutative. A ring in which division is possible but commutativity is not assumed (such as the quaternions) is called a division ring or skew field. (Historically, division rings were sometimes referred to as fields, while fields were called “commutative fields”.)
As a ring, a field may be classified as a specific type of integral domain, and can be characterized by the following (not necessarily exhaustive) chain of class inclusions:

An example of a field is the set Q of rational numbers. In Q, there are four essential operations: addition together with subtraction, and multiplication with division. Intuitively, a field is a set of numbers which has four such operations. In order to qualify as a field, these operations have to satisfy certain axioms.
A field is a set together with two operations, usually called addition and multiplication, and denoted by + and ·, respectively, such that the following axioms hold:

The easiest example for a field are the rational numbers consisting of fractions a/b, where a and b are integers, and b ≠ 0. The additive inverse of such a fraction is simply −a/b, and the multiplicative inverse—provided that a ≠ 0, as well—is b/a. To see the latter note that
The abstractly required field axioms reduce to standard properties of rational numbers, such as the law of distributivity
or the law of commutativity and law of associativity.

In addition to familiar number systems such as the rationals, there are other, less immediate examples of fields. The following example is a field consisting of four elements called O, I, A and B. The notation is chosen such that O plays the role of the additive identity element (denoted 0 in the axioms), and I is the multiplicative identity (denoted 1 above). Checking that all field axioms are indeed satisfied is easy, if tedious. For example:
The above field is called a finite field with four elements, denoted F4. Field theory is concerned with understanding the reasons for the existence of this field, defined in a fairly ad-hoc manner, and with describing its inner structure. For example, from a glance at the multiplication table, it can be seen that any non-zero element, i.e., I, A, and B, is a power of A. Indeed A = A1, B = A2 = A · A, and finally I = A3 = A · A · A. This is no coincidence, but one of the starting points of a deeper understanding of (finite) fields.

The axioms imposed above resemble the ones familiar from other algebraic structures. For example, the existence of the binary operation "·", together with its commutativity, associativity, (multiplicative) identity element and inverses are precisely the axioms for an abelian group. In other words, for any field, the subset of nonzero elements F \ {0}, also often denoted F×, is an abelian group (F×, ·) usually called multiplicative group of the field. Likewise (F, +) is an abelian group. The structure of a field is hence the same as specifying such two group structures (on the same set), obeying the distributivity.
Important other algebraic structures such as rings arise when requiring only part of the above axioms. For example, if the requirement of commutativity of the multiplication operation · is dropped, one gets structures usually called division rings or skew fields.

By elementary group theory, applied to the abelian groups (F×, ·), and (F, +), the additive inverse −a and the multiplicative inverse a−1 are uniquely determined by a.
Similar direct consequences from the field axioms include
as well as
Both can be shown by replacing b or c with 0 in the distributive property

The concept of field was used implicitly by Niels Henrik Abel and Évariste Galois in their work on the solvability of polynomial equations with rational coefficients of degree 5 or higher.
In 1871, Richard Dedekind called a set of real or complex numbers which is closed under the four arithmetic operations a "field". He used the German word Körper – "body" for this notion, hence the common use of the letter K to denote a field. He also defined rings (then called order or order-modul), but the term "a ring" (Zahlring) was invented by Hilbert. [1]
In 1881, Leopold Kronecker defined what he called a "domain of rationality", which is indeed a field of polynomials in modern terms. In 1893, Heinrich M. Weber gave the first clear definition of an abstract field.[2] In 1910 Ernst Steinitz published the very influential paper Algebraische Theorie der Körper (English: Algebraic Theory of Fields).[3] In this paper he axiomatically studies the properties of fields and defines many important field theoretic concepts like prime field, perfect field and the transcendence degree of a field extension.
Emil Artin developed the relationship between groups and fields in great detail during 1928-1942.


The field of rational numbers Q has been introduced above. A related class of fields very important in number theory are algebraic number fields. We will first give an example, namely the field Q[ζ3] consisting of expressions
where ζ is a third root of unity, i.e., a complex number satisfying ζ3 = 1, ζ ≠ 1, can be used to prove a special case of Fermat's last theorem, which asserts the non-existence of rational nonzero solutions to the equation
In the language of field extensions detailed below, Q[ζ3] is a field extension of degree 3. Algebraic number fields are by definition finite field extensions of Q, that is, fields containing Q having finite dimension as a Q-vector space.

Take the real numbers R, under the usual operations of addition and multiplication. When the real numbers are given the usual ordering, they form a complete ordered field; it is this structure which provides the foundation for most formal treatments of calculus.
The complex numbers C consist of expressions
where i is the imaginary unit, i.e., a (non-real) number satisfying i2 = −1. Addition and multiplication of real numbers are defined in such a way that all field axioms hold for C. For example, the distributive law enforces
The real numbers can be constructed by completing the rational numbers, i.e., filling the "gaps": for example √2 is such a gap. By a formally very similar procedure, another important class of fields, the field of p-adic numbers Qp is built. It is used in number theory and p-adic analysis.
Hyperreal numbers and superreal numbers extend the real numbers with the addition of infinitesimal and infinite numbers.

In antiquity, several geometric problems concerned the (in)feasibility to construct certain numbers with compass and straightedge. For example it was unknown to the Greeks that it is in general impossible to trisect a given angle. Using the field notion and field theory allows to settle these problems. To do so, the field of constructible numbers is considered. It contains, on the plane, the points 0 and 1, and all complex numbers that can be constructed from these two by a finite number of construction steps using only compass and straightedge. This set, endowed with the usual addition and multiplication of complex numbers does form a field. For example, multiplying two (real) numbers r1 and r2 that have already been constructed can be done using construction at the right, based on the intercept theorem. This way, the obtained field F contains all rational numbers, but is bigger than Q, because for any f ∈ F, the square root of f is also a constructible number.

Finite fields (also called Galois fields) are fields with finitely many elements. The above introductory example F4 is a field with four elements. Highlighted in the multiplication and addition tables above is the field F2 consisting of two elements O and I. This is the smallest field, because by definition a field has at least two distinct elements 1 ≠ 0. Interpreting the addition and multiplication in this latter field as XOR and Logical AND operation, this field finds applications in computer science, especially in cryptography and coding theory.
In any finite field, there is necessarily an integer n such that 1 + 1 + ... + 1 (n repeated terms) equals 0. It can be shown that the smallest such n must be a prime number, called the characteristic of the field. (If 1 + 1 + ... + 1 is never zero, for any number of summands, such as in Q, for example, the characteristic is said to be zero.)
The basic class of finite fields are the fields Fp with p elements (p a prime number):
where the operations are defined by performing the operation in the set of integers Z, dividing by p and taking the remainder; see modular arithmetic. Any field of characteristic p necessarily contains Fp, and thus can be viewed as a vector space over the smaller field, of finite dimension. I.e., any finite field has to have q = pn elements, n > 0. By developing more field theory, in particular the notion of the splitting field, which is, in general a field containing all roots of a given polynomial, and minimal with this property, one can show that any two finite fields with the same number of elements have indeed the same field structure, i.e., multiplication and addition behave the same way. The finite field with q elements is usually denoted Fq.

Given a geometric object X, one can consider functions on such objects. Adding and multiplying them pointwise, i.e., (f·g)(x) = f(x) · g(x) this leads to a field. However, due to the presence of possible zeros, i.e., points x ∈ X where f(x) = 0, one has to take poles into account, i.e., formally allowing f(x) = ∞.
If X is an algebraic variety over F, then the rational functions V → F, i.e., functions defined almost everywhere, form a field, the function field of V. Likewise, if X is a Riemann surface, then the meromorphic functions S → C form a field. Under certain circumstances, namely when S is compact, S can be reconstructed from this field.

Another important distinction in the realm of fields, especially with regard to number theory, are local fields and global fields. Morally, local fields are completions of global fields at a given place. For example, Q is a global field, and the attached local fields are Qp and R (Ostrowski's theorem). Algebraic number fields and function fields over Fq are further global fields. Studying arithmetic questions in global fields may sometimes be done by looking at the corresponding questions locally – this technique is called local-global principle.



Assuming the axiom of choice, for every field F, there exists a field F, called the algebraic closure of F, which contains F, is algebraic over F, which means that any element x of F satisfies a polynomial equation
