Molten salt reactor
A molten salt reactor (MSR) is a type of nuclear reactor where the primary coolant is a molten salt. There have been many designs put forward for use of this type of reactor as a nuclear power plant and a few prototypes built. The concept is one of those proposed for development as a generation IV reactor. The initial reference design would be 1000 MWe with a deployment target date of 2025.
In many designs the nuclear fuel is dissolved in the molten fluoride salt coolant as uranium tetrafluoride (UF4). The fluid becomes critical in a graphite core which serves as the moderator. Many modern designs rely on ceramic fuel dispersed in a graphite matrix, with the molten salt providing low pressure, high temperature cooling. The salts are much more efficient at removing heat from the core, reducing the need for pumping, piping, and reducing the size of the core as these components are reduced in size.
Early reactors were primarily concerned with the reduction in size that the molten salt design could provide, which allowed them to be small enough to fit on an aircraft. More recent research has focused on the practical advantages of the high-temperature low-pressure primary cooling loop. The low pressure makes the entire reactor core much simpler and lighter, while the high temperatures makes the turbines that extract energy much more efficient, allowing them to be smaller as well. Another advantage of a small core is better neutron economy, which makes the molten salt design particularly suitable for use with non-uranium fuel cycles.
The reactors are intended for use in nuclear power plants to produce electrical power from nuclear fuel.


Extensive research into molten salt reactors started with the US Aircraft Reactor Experiment (ARE). The US Aircraft Reactor Experiment was a 2.5 MWth nuclear reactor experiment designed to attain a high power density for use as an engine in a nuclear powered bomber. The project resulted in several experiments, three of which resulted in engine tests collectively called the Heat Transfer Reactor Experiments: HTRE-l, HTRE-2, and HTRE-3. One experiment used the molten fluoride salt NaF-ZrF4-UF4 (53-41-6쟭ol%) as fuel, was moderated by beryllium oxide (BeO), used liquid sodium as a secondary coolant, and had a peak temperature of 860 째C. It operated for a 1000 hour cycle in 1954. This experiment used Inconel 600 alloy for the metal structure and piping.

Oak Ridge National Laboratory took the lead in researching the MSR through 1960s, and much of their work culminated with the Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE). The MSRE was a 7.4 MWth test reactor simulating the neutronic "kernel" of an inherently safe epithermal thorium breeder reactor. It tested molten salt fuels of uranium and plutonium. The tested 233UF4 fluid fuel has a unique decay path that minimizes waste, with waste isotopes having half-lives under 50 years. The red-hot 650 째C temperature of the reactor could power high-efficiency heat engines such as gas turbines. The large, expensive breeding blanket of thorium salt was omitted in favor of neutron measurements.
The MSRE was located at ORNL. Its piping, core vat and structural components were made from Hastelloy-N and its moderator was pyrolytic graphite. It went critical in 1965 and ran for four years. The fuel for the MSRE was LiF-BeF2-ZrF4-UF4 (65-30-5-0.1), the graphite core moderated it, and its secondary coolant was FLiBe (2LiF-BeF2). It reached temperatures as high as 650 째C and operated for the equivalent of about 1.5 years of full power operation. (For more information, see the main article.)

The culmination of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory research during the 1970-76 timeframe resulted in an MSR design which would use LiF-BeF2-ThF4-UF4 (72-16-12-0.4) as fuel, was to be moderated by graphite with a 4 year replacement schedule, use NaF-NaBF4 as the secondary coolant, and have a peak operating temperature of 705 째C. However, to date the molten salt reactor remains a "paper design", that is, no molten salt reactors have been built other than the experimental MSRE.

Research is currently picking up again for reactors that utilize molten salts for coolant. Both the traditional molten salt reactor and the Very High Temperature Reactor (VHTR) have been picked as potential designs to be studied under the Generation Four Initiative (GEN-IV). A version of the VHTR currently being studied is the Liquid Salt Very High Temperature Reactor (LS-VHTR). It is essentially a standard VHTR design that uses liquid salt as a coolant in the primary loop, rather than a single helium loop. It relies on "TRISO" fuel dispersed in graphite. The fuel graphite would be in the form of graphite rods that would be inserted in hexagonal moderating graphite blocks. The molten salt would pass through holes drilled in the graphite blocks. The LS-VHTR has many attractive features, including: the ability to work at very high temperatures (the boiling point of most molten salts being considered are >1400 째C), low pressure cooling that can be used to more easily match hydrogen production facility conditions (most thermo chemical cycles require temperatures in excess of 750 째C), better electric conversion efficiency than a helium cooled VHTR operating at similar conditions, passive safety systems, and better retention of fission products in the event of an accident.

The FUJI mini-MSR is a 100 MWe molten-salt-fueled Thorium fuel cycle thermal breeder reactor, using technology similar to the Oak Ridge National Laboratory Reactor. It is being developed by a consortium including members from Japan, the U.S. and Russia. As a breeder reactor, it converts Thorium into nuclear fuels. As a thermal-spectrum reactor, its neutron regulation is inherently safe. Like all molten salt reactors, its core is chemically inert, under low pressures to prevent explosions and toxic releases.[1]


The classic MSFR has been very exciting to many nuclear engineers. Its most prominent champion was Alvin Weinberg, who patented the light-water reactor and was a director of the U.S.'s Oak Ridge National Laboratory, a prominent nuclear research center.
Two concepts were investigated. The "two fluid" reactor had a high-neutron-density core that burned uranium-233 (U233) from the thorium fuel cycle. A blanket of thorium salt absorbed the neutrons and was eventually transmuted to U233 fuel. The weakness of the two-fluid design was that its known designs included complex plumbing, and no suitable material was known to make the pipes. Ordinary steels and nickel alloys either absorbed too many neutrons or corroded too easily. Graphite was thought to be too brittle, and swells slightly under intense neutron exposure. Zirconium is sufficiently transparent to neutrons, but corrodes too easily when exposed to hot fluoride salts.
The engineers discovered that by carefully sculpting the moderator rods (to get neutron densities similar to a core and blanket), and modifying the fuel reprocessing chemistry, both thorium and uranium salts could coexist in a simpler, less expensive yet efficient "one fluid" reactor.
The power reactor design produced by Weinberg's research group was similar to the MSRE above, which was designed to validate the risky hot, high-neutron-density "kernel" part of the "kernel and blanket" thorium breeder.

The advantages cited by Weinberg and his associates at Oak Ridge National Laboratory include:

A molten salt reactor's fuel can be continuously reprocessed with a small adjacent chemical plant. Weinberg's groups at Oak Ridge National Laboratory found that a very small reprocessing facility can service a large 1쟃W power plant: All the salt has to be reprocessed, but only every ten days. The reactor's total inventory of expensive, poisonous radioactives is therefore much less than in a conventional light-water-reactor's fuel cycle, which have to store spent fuel rod assemblies. Also, everything except fuel and waste stays inside the plant. The reprocessing cycle is:
With salt distillation, an MSFR can burn plutonium, or even fluorinated nuclear waste from light water reactors.

With fuel reprocessing, the Thorium fuel cycle, so impractical in other types of reactors, produces 0.1%[citation needed] of the long-term high-level radioactive waste of a light-water reactor without reprocessing (all modern reactors in the U.S.).


Molten salt reactors, nevertheless, present a number of design challenges. Known issues include:
An MSR based on chloride salts has many of the same advantages. However, the heavier nuclei of chlorine are less moderating, which causes the reactor to be a fast reactor. Theoretically, it wastes even fewer neutrons and breeds more efficiently, though it may be less safe. It would require a salt with an isotopically-pure chlorine-37, to prevent neutronic activation of the chlorine into sulfur which would form corrosive sulfur chloride.


Combining the above, some form of molten-salt thorium breeder could be the most efficient well-developed energy source known, whether measured by cost per kW, capital cost or social costs.

Molten-salt-fueled reactors (MSFR) are quite different from molten-salt-cooled reactors (MSCR), a Gen IV proposal. The MSCR cannot reprocess fuel easily and has fuel rods that need to be fabricated and validated, delaying deployment by up to twenty years from project inception. However, since it uses fabricated fuel, reactor manufacturers can still proft by selling fuel assemblies. Also, the reactor's core retains many safety and cost advantages. Notably, there's no steam in the core to cause an explosion, and no large, expensive steel pressure vessel. Since it can operate at high temperatures, the conversion of the heat to electricity can also use an efficient, light weight Brayton cycle gas turbine.
Much of the current research on MSCRs is focused on small compact heat exchangers. By using smaller heat exchangers, less molten salt needs to be used and therefore significant cost savings could be achieved.
Molten salts can be highly corrosive, more so as temperatures rise. For the primary cooling loop of the MSR, a material is needed that can withstand corrosion at high temperatures and intense radiation. Experiments show that Hastelloy-N and similar alloys are quite suited to the tasks at operating temperatures up to about 700 째C. However, long-term experience with a production scale reactor has yet to be gained. Higher operating temperatures would be desirable, especially since at 850 째C thermo chemical production of hydrogen becomes possible. Materials for this temperature range have not yet been found, though carbon composites, carbides, and refractory metal based or ODS alloys might be feasible.

The salt mixtures are chosen to make the reactor safer and more practical. Fluorides are favored because fluorine doesn't need expensive isotope separation (as chlorine does). It does not easily become radioactive under neutron bombardment. It also absorbs less neutrons and slows ("moderates") neutrons better. Fluorides boil at very high temperatures because of their low vapor pressures. They also must be very hot before they break down into simpler compounds, or corrode materials (they are "chemically stable").
Reactor salts are also eutectic mixtures to reduce their melting point. This makes a heat engine more efficient, because more heat can be removed from the salt before reheating it in the reactor.
Some salts are so useful that isotope separation is worthwhile. Chlorides permit fast breeder reactors to be constructed using molten salts. Not nearly as much work has been done on reactor designs using them. Chlorine must be purified to Cl37 to reduce production of radioactive elements. Also, any lithium in a salt mixture must be purified lithium-7 to reduce tritium production.
Due to the high "redox window" of fused fluoride salts, the chemical potential of the fused salt system can be changed. Fluorine-Lithium-Beryllium ("FLiBe") can be used with beryllium additions to lower the electrochemical potential and almost eliminate corrosion. However, beryllium is extremely toxic. Many other salts can cause corrosion, especially if the reactor is hot enough to make hydrogen.
To date, most research has focused on FLiBe, because Lithium and Beryllium are reasonably effective moderators, and form a eutectic salt mixture with a lower melting point than each of the constituent salts. Beryllium also performs neutron doubling, improving the neutron economy. This process occurs when the Beryllium nucleus re-emit two neutrons after absorbing a single neutron. For the fuel carrying salts, ge
