Gerund
In linguistics, "gerund" is a term which is used to refer to various non-finite verb forms in various languages:

In English the gerund is often identical in form to the present participle (ending in -ing) and can behave as a verb within a clause (so that it may be modified by an adverb or have an object), but the clause as a whole (sometimes consisting only of one word, the gerund) acts as a noun within the larger sentence. For example:
In the phrase "Editing this article" (although this is traditionally known as a phrase, it is referred to as a non-finite clause in modern linguistics), the word "Editing" behaves as a verb; the phrase "this article" is the object of that verb. But the whole phrase "Editing this article" acts as a noun within the sentence as a whole; it is the subject of the verb "is."
Other examples of the gerund:

Verbs that are often followed by a gerund include admit, adore, anticipate, appreciate, avoid, carry on, consider, contemplate, delay, deny, describe, detest, dislike, enjoy, escape, fancy, feel, finish, give, hear, imagine, include, justify, listen to, mention, mind, miss, notice, observe, perceive, postpone, practice, quit, recall, report, resent, resume, risk, see, sense, sleep, stop, suggest, tolerate and watch. Additionally, prepositions are often followed by a gerund.
For example:

With little change in meaning
begin, continue, start; hate, like, love, prefer
With would, the verbs hate, like, love, and prefer are usually followed by the to-infinitive.

In these examples, if the subject of the verb is not the subject of the second verb, the second verb must be a gerund (instead of an infinitive)
If I am watching sports on television, for example, I can react to the programs only as follows:
With a change in meaning
dread and hate:
These two verbs are followed by a to-infinitive when talking subjunctively (usually when using to think), but by a gerund when talking about general dislikes.
forget and remember:
When these have meanings which are used to talk about the future from the given time, the to-infinitive is used, but when looking back in time, the gerund.
cannot bear:
go on:
mean:
advise, recommend and forbid:
These are followed by a to-infinitive when there is an object as well, but with a gerund otherwise.
regret:
consider, contemplate and recommend:
These verbs are followed by a to-infinitive only in the passive or with an object pronoun.
try:
When a to-infinitive is used, it means the subject makes an effort at; attempt or endeavor to do something. If a gerund is used, it means the subject attempts to do something in testing to see what might happen.
It is important to remember that the particle, to, can also be used to introduce the infinitive. For example, in the sentence: "I went to the store to buy milk", the first "to" acts as a preposition of place, explaining where I went. However, the second to does not act as a preposition, but rather introduces the infinitive "buy", which explains why I went.

In traditional English grammar, a noun or pronoun preceding a gerund must be genitive (possessive).
It is increasingly[citation needed] common to see the objective used in place of the possessive:

Insofar as there is a distinction between gerunds and present participles, it is generally fairly clear which is which; a gerund-participle that is the subject or object of a preposition is a gerund if it refers to the performance of an action (but note that present participles may be used substantively to refer to the performer of an action), while one that modifies a noun attributively or absolutely is a participle. The main source of potential ambiguity is when a gerund-participle follows a verb; in this case it may be seen either as a predicate adjective (in which case it is a participle), or as a direct object or predicate nominative (in either of which cases it is a gerund). In this case, a few transformations can help distinguish them. In the table that follows, ungrammatical sentences are marked with asterisks, per common linguistic practice; note that the transformations all produce grammatical sentences with similar meanings when applied to sentences with gerunds, but either ungrammatical sentences, or sentences with completely different meanings, when applied to sentences with participles.
None of these transformations is a perfect test, however.

English words ending in "ing" are often transformed into pseudo-anglicisms in other languages, where their use is somewhat different than in English itself. In many of these cases, the loanword has functionally become a noun rather than a gerund. For instance, "camping" is a campsite in Bulgarian, Dutch, French, Italian, Romanian, Russian, and Spanish; in Bulgarian, Dutch, French, Polish and Russian "parking" is a parking lot (car park in British English); and "lifting" is a facelift in Bulgarian, French, German, Italian, Polish, Romanian, and Spanish. The French word for shampoo is "(le) shampooing."

In the Molesworth books by Geoffrey Willans and Ronald Searle, Searle included a series of cartoons on the private life of the gerund, intended to parody the linguistic snobbery of Latin teachers' striving after strict grammatical correctness, and the difficulty experienced by students in comprehending the construction.
Owen Johnson's "Lawrenceville Stories" feature a Latin teacher who constantly demands that his students determine whether a given word is a gerund or a gerundive.


