Guerrilla marketing
Product / Pricing / Promotion
Distribution / Service / Retail
Brand management
Account-based marketing
Marketing effectiveness
Market research
Marketing strategy
Marketing management
Market dominance
Advertising / Branding
Direct marketing / Personal Sales
Product placement / Public relations
Publicity / Sales promotion
Sex in advertising / Underwriting
Printing / Publication / Broadcasting
Out-of-home / Internet marketing
Point of sale / Novelty items
Digital marketing / In-game
Word of mouth
Guerrilla marketing is an unconventional system of promotions that relies on time, energy and imagination rather than a big marketing budget. Typically, guerrilla marketing tactics are unexpected and unconventional; consumers are targeted in unexpected places, which can make the idea that's being marketed memorable, generate buzz, and even spread virally. The term was coined and defined by Jay Conrad Levinson in his 1983 book Guerrilla Marketing. The term has since entered the popular vocabulary and marketing textbooks.
Guerilla Marketing involves unusual approaches such as intercept encounters in public places, street giveaways of products, pr stunts, any unconventional marketing intended to get maximum results from minimal resources. More innovative approaches to Guerilla marketing now utilize cutting edge mobile digital technologies to really engage the consumer and create a memorable brand experience. Great examples of this type of marketing include products such as T-Shirt TV T-shirttv.com, the mobile media chariot or video segway, and ice cream truck advertising, created by Guerrilla Marketing companies like Brand Marketers Brand Marketers

Levinson's books include hundreds of "guerrilla marketing weapons," but they also encourage guerrilla marketeers to be creative and devise their own unconventional methods of promotion. A guerrilla marketeer uses all of his or her contacts, both professional and personal, and examines his company and its products, looking for sources of publicity. Many forms of publicity can be very inexpensive, others are free.
Levinson says that when implementing guerrilla marketing tactics, small size is actually an advantage instead of a disadvantage. Small organizations and entrepreneurs are able to obtain publicity more easily than large companies as they are closer to their customers and considerably more agile.
Yet ultimately, according to Levinson, the Guerrilla Marketeer must "deliver the goods". In The Guerrilla Marketing Handbook, he states: "In order to sell a product or a service, a company must establish a relationship with the customer. It must build trust and support. It must understand the customer's needs, and it must provide a product that delivers the promised benefits."
Levinson identifies the following principles as the foundation of guerrilla marketing:

The term Guerrilla Marketing is now often used more loosely as a descriptor for non-traditional media, such as:
Guerrilla marketing was initially used by small and medium size (SMEs) businesses, but it is now increasingly adopted by large businesses. Excessive use and abuse, expecially from great companies, generated a progressive loss of effectiveness. In some cases the result has been opposite to that one hoped.[citation needed]


On 31 January 2007, several magnetic light displays in and around the city of Boston, Massachusetts, were mistaken for possible explosive devices. Several subway stations, bridges, and a portion of Interstate 93 were closed as police examined, removed, and in some cases, destroyed the devices. The suspicious objects were revealed to be ads depicting the Mooninites, Ignignokt and Err, characters from the Cartoon Network's latenight Adult Swim animated television series Aqua Teen Hunger Force.

In December 2007, a staff member of on hold advertising company, took a life-size placard of cricket legend Shane Warne wearing a branded t-shirt and the company’s tell-tale ‘giant hand’ outside the West Australian Cricket Ground at the 3rd Ashes Test. The act of ambush marketing was noticed and the staff member issued a fine for ‘displaying a sign without a permit’, sparking a nationwide debate over wearing clothing with brand names.[1]



The Taboo Group (Melbourne, Australia)
Brand Marketers (New York, New York)


