Folding@home
Folding@home (sometimes abbreviated as FAH or F@h) is a distributed computing (DC) project designed to perform computationally intensive simulations of protein folding and other molecular dynamics (MD). It was launched on October 1, 2000, and is currently managed by the Pande Group, within Stanford University's chemistry department, under the supervision of Professor Vijay Pande. Folding@home is the most powerful distributed computing cluster in the world, according to Guinness,[1] and one of the world's largest distributed computing projects.[2] The goal of the project is "to understand protein folding, misfolding, and related diseases."[3]

Accurate simulations of protein folding and misfolding enable the scientific community to better understand the development of many diseases, including sickle-cell disease (drepanocytosis), Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, mad cow disease, cancer, Huntington's disease, cystic fibrosis, osteogenesis imperfecta, alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency, and other aggregation-related diseases.[4] More fundamentally, understanding the process of protein folding — how biological molecules assemble themselves into a functional state — is one of the outstanding problems of molecular biology. So far, the Folding@home project has successfully simulated folding in the 5-10 microsecond range — a time scale thousands of times longer than it was previously thought possible to model. The Pande Group goal is to refine and improve the MD and Folding@home DC methods to the level where it will become an essential tool for the MD research.[5] For that goal they collaborate with various scientific institutions.[6] As of February 19, 2009, sixty-three scientific research papers have been published using the project's work.[7] A University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign report dated October 22, 2002 states that Folding@home distributed simulations of protein folding are demonstrably accurate.[8]

Folding@home does not rely on powerful supercomputers for its data processing; instead, the primary contributors to the Folding@home project are many hundreds of thousands of personal computer users who have installed a small client program. The client will, at the user's choice, run in the background, utilizing otherwise unused CPU power, or run as a screensaver only while the user is away. In most modern personal computers, the CPU is rarely used to its full capacity at all times; the Folding@home client takes advantage of this unused processing power.
The Folding@home client periodically connects to a server to retrieve "work units", which are packets of data upon which to perform calculations. Each completed work unit is then sent back to the server. As data integrity is a major concern for all distributed computing projects, all work units are validated through the use of a 2048 bit digital signature.
Contributors to Folding@home may have user names used to keep track of their contributions. Each user may be running the client on one or more CPUs; for example, a user with two computers could run the client on both of them. Users may also contribute under one or more team names; many different users may join together to form a team. Contributors are assigned a score indicating the number and difficulty of completed work units. Rankings and other statistics are posted to the Folding@home website.

The Folding@home client utilizes modified versions of five molecular simulation programs for calculation: TINKER, GROMACS, AMBER, CPMD, and SHARPEN.[9] Where possible, optimizations are used to speed the process of calculation. There are many variations on these base simulation programs, each of which is given an arbitrary identifier (Core xx):[10]




Shortly after breaking the 200,000 active CPU count on September 20, 2005, the Folding@home project celebrated its fifth anniversary on October 1, 2005.
Interest and participation in the project has grown steadily since its launch. The number of active devices participating in the project increased substantially after receiving much publicity during the launch of their high performance clients for both ATi graphics cards and the PlayStation 3, and again following the launch of the high performance client for nVidia graphics cards.
As of February 18, 2009 the peak speed of the project overall has reached over 5.0 PFLOPS from around 400,000 active machines, and the project has received computational results from over 3.75 million devices since it first started.[2]

There used to be cooperation between Folding@home and Google Labs in the form of Google Toolbar. Google Compute supported Folding@home during its early stage — when Folding@home had ~10,000 active CPUs. At that time, a boost of 20,000 machines was very significant. Today the project has a large number of active CPUs and the number of new clients joining Google Compute was very low (most people opted for the Folding@home client instead), so it was discontinued. The Google Compute clients also had certain limits: they could only run the TINKER core and had limited naming and team options. Folding@home is no longer supported on Google Toolbar, and even the old Google Toolbar client will not work.[15]

Folding@home absorbed the Genome@home project on March 8, 2004. The work which was started by the Genome@home project has since been completed using the Folding@home network (the work units without deadlines), and no new work is being distributed by this project. All donators were encouraged to download the Folding@home client (the F@h 4.xx client had a Genome@home option), and once the Genome@home work was complete these clients were asked to donate their processing power to the Folding@home project instead.

On September 16, 2007, the Folding@home project officially attained a sustained performance level higher than one petaFLOPS, becoming the first computing system of any kind in the world to ever do so, although it had briefly peaked above one petaFLOPS in March 2007, receiving a large amount of main stream media coverage for doing so.[16][17] In early May 2008 the project attained a sustained performance level higher than two petaFLOPS, followed by the three and four petaFLOPS milestones on August 20 and September 28, 2008 respectively. On February 18, 2009, Folding@home achieved a performance level of 5033TFLOPS, thereby becoming the first computing system of any kind to surpass 5 PFLOPS[18], just as it was for the other four milestones.
The Folding@home computing cluster currently operates at above 5 petaFLOPS at all times, with a large majority of the performance coming from GPU and PlayStation 3 clients.[2] In comparison to this, the fastest standalone supercomputer (non-distributive computing) in the world (as of November 2008, U.S. DOE's Roadrunner) peaks at approximately 1.46 petaFLOPS.[19]

These peer-reviewed papers (in chronological order) all use research from the Folding@home project.[7]


