Nana (manga)
Nana (ナナ ?) is a Japanese shōjo manga series written and illustrated by Ai Yazawa, serialised in Cookie published by Shueisha. There is an anime adaptation, as well as two live-action films. The first twelve volumes of the manga series have cumulatively sold over 22 million copies.[1]As in 2005, it has sold over 34,500,000 making it the fourth best selling shōjo manga worldwide.[2] The manga derives its title from the name of the two main characters, both of whom are called Nana. What sets them apart, however, is the stark difference between their lives. One Nana comes from a small town, following along with her friends and boyfriend to Tokyo with the hope of having the dream life that she wishes for. The other Nana, on the other side, comes to Tokyo with the goal of making it big with her band, Black Stones. The two Nanas are brought together in what has become a major success for Ai Yazawa and the shōjo genre.[citation needed]
Nana is presently being released in North America by Viz Media. It ended its serialization in the August 2007 issue of Shojo Beat and was replaced by Honey and Clover. It will continue, however, to be released in tankōbon (graphic novel format).[3] The manga has also been adapted into a highly successful live-action film with a sequel released on December 9, 2006, and an anime adaptation that premiered on April 5, 2006. The anime adaptation has subsequently been announced as licensed for release in North America by Viz Media.[4] In 2003, the manga won the Shogakukan Manga Award for shōjo.[5]
As of March 10, 2009, there are 15 volumes available in English in the United States, with a 16th volume set to be released on May 5, 2009.

Nana Osaki is a punk singer who wants to debut with her band Black Stones (BLAST for short). Nana was the lead vocalist in their old band with her boyfriend, Ren, and they lived together as lovers since she was 15. When Ren is offered a chance to debut in Tokyo as a replacement member of the popular band Trapnest (Taranesu in Japanese), Nana chooses to cultivate her own band after Ren leaves her and Black Stones for Trapnest. Has too much pride to just follow Ren to Tokyo and happily be a rockstar's girlfriend, she stays behind. She leaves for Tokyo at the age of twenty, and to start her musical career.
Nana Komatsu, the other Nana, is called with the nickname Hachi (after Hachikō) as she has weak mental characteristics that resemble a puppy. With a habit of falling in love at first sight all the time, Hachi has always depended on other people to help her. When her friends and then boyfriend leave for Tokyo, she decides to join them a year later after having saved enough money at the age of 20.
Nana and Hachi meet in a train by chance, both on their way to Tokyo. After a string of coincidences, they come to live together in an apartment numbered 707. Despite having contrasting characters and ideals, the Nanas like and respect each other.
While the Black Stones begin to gain popularity at live gigs, other issues need resolving, especially in the areas of romance. The story of Nana revolves heavily on the romance and relationships of the two characters as one seeks fame and recognition while the other seeks love and happiness.

Nana Osaki is a punk-rock singer with a style to match, and Nana Komatsu, also known as Hachi, a small-town girl who moves to Tokyo to start a new life. They meet on a train, and their destinies are sealed. Viz Media, the English translator of the manga, often refers to the girls as "Nana O." and "Nana K." because in the Japanese manga the girls' names were spelled using different characters, making it easier to determine which Nana people were talking about.
The characters in Nana have complex personalities and their own histories, which sometimes intertwine with one another. The importance of each character grows in the manga as the story progresses to many dramatic heights and falls. The two main characters in particular, Nana O. and Nana K., support each other greatly, as evidenced both in the story and in the narration, which is done by either Nana at the beginning and end of each volume.
Other important characters include Hachi's friends and ex-boyfriend, who she followed from her hometown to Tokyo, the members of Nana O.'s band (Black Stones), and the members of the band Trapnest.


Nana has been made into a film which was released on September 3, 2005. The film stars Mika Nakashima as the punk star Nana Osaki, and Aoi Miyazaki as Hachi (Nana Komatsu). The DVD edition was released on March 3, 2006. The film did quite well at the Japanese box office, grossing more than 4 billion yen, staying in the top 10 for several weeks.


In addition to creating a Nana craze throughout Asia, the film also helped launch Mika Nakashima to the peak of her career as she released the single "Glamorous Sky" under the name Nana starring Mika Nakashima. The single created topicality with its special collaboration between Nakashima, Hyde (who wrote the song), and Nana author Yazawa Ai (who wrote the lyrics). The single beca
