In Rainbows
In Rainbows is the seventh album by the English alternative rock band Radiohead. It was first released on 10 October 2007 as a digital download, followed by a standard CD release in most countries during the last week of 2007. The album was released in North America on 1 January 2008. In Rainbows was Radiohead's first release after the end of their contract with EMI and the end of the longest gap between studio albums in their career.
In Rainbows was recorded in London, Somerset, Wiltshire, and Oxfordshire with producers Mark Stent and Nigel Godrich. Radiohead worked on In Rainbows for more than two years, beginning in early 2005. In between recording, the band toured Europe and North America for three months in mid-2006. The songwriting on In Rainbows was more personal than that on Radiohead's other albums, with singer Thom Yorke describing most tracks as his versions of "seduction songs".[1] Radiohead incorporated a wide variety of musical styles and instruments on the album, using not only electronic music and string arrangements, but also pianos, celestes, and the ondes Martenot.
Days after announcing the album's completion, Radiohead released In Rainbows as a digital download that customers could order for whatever price they saw fit. Upon its retail release, In Rainbows entered the UK Album Chart and the U.S. Billboard 200 at number one; it went on to sell three million copies worldwide in both digital and physical formats. The album earned widespread critical acclaim, and was ranked as one of the best albums of 2007 by several publications. In 2009, the record won two Grammy Awards for Best Alternative Music Album and Best Special Limited Edition Package.


After a break from writing and recording in 2004, Radiohead began work on their seventh studio album in mid-February 2005.[2] Regular recording sessions began in August 2005, with the band updating fans on their progress intermittently in their new blog, Dead Air Space. Recording continued into early 2006, but the sessions were slow. According to Yorke, "we spent a long time in the studio just not going anywhere, wasting our time, and that was really, really frustrating."[3] The delay was attributed to difficulty regaining momentum after their break,[3] and the lack of both a deadline and producer to push things forward.[4] In the February 2006 sessions, they chose to work with producer Mark Stent instead of their longtime co-producer Nigel Godrich.[5] Bassist Colin Greenwood, commenting on their decision, said "Nigel and the band know each other so well now, it's all got a little too safe."[4] Although the band had written several new songs by this point, little came of the recording sessions with Stent, which ended in April 2006.
The band decided to tour again, giving themselves a goal to work toward. Commenting on their preparation for the tour, Yorke said "suddenly everyone is being spontaneous and no one's self-conscious because you're not in the studio ... it felt like being 16 again."[3] In May and June 2006, Radiohead toured major cities in Europe and North America, returning to Europe for several festivals in August. Radiohead played in smaller venues such as clubs and theatres during the tour, which was their first in several years. The band also played larger music festivals such as Bonnaroo and V; they headlined V and played their longest live concert in years at Bonnaroo, a 28-song set.[6][7] During their live sets, the band included songs they were working on in the studio.[3]
After the tour, the band restarted recording sessions with Godrich in October 2006, at Tottenham Court House in Marlborough, Wiltshire, a condemned mansion described by guitarist Ed O'Brien as an "old country pile ... crumbling at the seams." Recording, in contrast to their deadlocked 2005 sessions, was productive; final versions of "Jigsaw Falling into Place" and "Bodysnatchers" were recorded at the house.[8] Yorke said on Dead Air Space that the band have "started the record properly now ... starting to get somewhere I think. Finally."[9] Further sessions at Halswell House, Taunton, and Godrich's Hospital Studios in Covent Garden, where the band recorded "Videotape" and put together a final version of "Nude", took place in late December 2006.[8] In mid-January 2007 Radiohead resumed their recording sessions in their Oxfordshire studio, and started to post photos, lyrics, videos and samples of new songs on Dead Air Space.[10] In late April, Yorke stated that Radiohead had a CD of material ready for consideration.[11] In June, Godrich posted clippings of the mixed songs on Dead Air Space, among which were "Jigsaw Falling into Place" (known as "Open Pick" throughout 2006 performances),[12] "Down Is the New Up", "Bangers + Mash", "All I Need", "Faust Arp" and "Weird Fishes/Arpeggi".[13] Having completed recording the album in June, Radiohead mastered the album in July 2007 in New York City.[14]

The album features many of the tracks debuted on Radiohead's 2006 tour, including "15 Step", "Bodysnatchers", "All I Need" and "Videotape". "Arpeggi" and "Open Pick", songs debuted during the band's 2006 tour, also made their way onto the album, but were retitled "Weird Fishes/Arpeggi" and "Jigsaw Falling into Place", respectively. The song "Nude", which premiered live during the OK Computer world tour, was finally released on In Rainbows, albeit with a different arrangement. "Reckoner" which originally premiered live in 2001, was also released on this album, but in a completely different form; Yorke and guitarist Jonny Greenwood worked on extra material for the song and subsequently abandoned the original material.[15]
On the opening track "15 Step", the band enlisted the help of a group of children from the Matrix Music School & Arts Centre in Oxford.[16] Colin Greenwood and Godrich originally set out to record handclaps for the song, but when the clapping proved "not quite good enough", they decided to record the children cheering instead.[1] "Bodysnatchers", a song Yorke described as sounding like Wolfmother and "Neu! meets dodgy hippy rock",[4] was recorded when he was in a period of "hyperactive mania".[1] On "All I Need", Jonny Greenwood wanted to recapture the white noise generated by a band playing loudly in a room, a sound which never occurs in the studio. His solution was to have a string section play every note of the scale, blanketing the frequencies.[17] Yorke described the process of composing "Videotape" as "absolute agony", stating that the song "went through every possible parameter". One day, Yorke left the studio, returning to find that Godrich and Jonny Greenwood had stripped the song down to the version found on the album, a minimal piano ballad.[18]
Yorke has said that the album's lyrics are based on "that anonymous fear thing, sitting in traffic, thinking, 'I'm sure I'm supposed to be doing something else' ... it's similar to OK Computer in a way. It's much more terrifying."[19] In another interview, Yorke said the album was "about the fucking panic of realising you're going to die! And that any time soon [I could] possibly [have] a heart attack when I next go for a run."[20] Ed O'Brien described the lyrics, saying "They were universal. There wasn't a political agenda. It's being human."[21] The song "Bodysnatchers" is inspired by Victorian ghost stories, the 1972 novel The Stepford Wives and Yorke's feeling of "your physical consciousness trapped without being able to connect fully with anything else."[17] "Jigsaw Falling into Place" is about a set of observations and different experiences, partly of the chaos witnessed by Yorke when he used to go out on the weekend in Oxford. Yorke said "The lyrics are quite caustic—the idea of 'before you're comatose' or whatever, drinking yourself into oblivion and getting fucked-up to forget ... [there] is partly this elation. But there's a much darker side."[1]

The album artwork was designed by Stanley Donwood, who has worked with Yorke in designing all album artwork since 1994.[22] For the album, Donwood experimented with a photographic etching technique, putting prints into acid baths with random results.[23] Donwood originally planned on doing an exploration on suburban life, but quickly realised it did not fit the album's sound, saying "it's a sensual record and I wanted to do something more organic." During the recording of the album, Donwood regularly put up images in the studio and on the studio computer, letting the band interact directly and comment on them. He also posted images daily on the band's website, though none of the images were used in the final album artwork.[24] Donwood describing the album cover, said "it's very colourful—I've finally embraced colour! It's a rainbow but it is very toxic, it's more like the sort of one you'd see in a puddle." The band decided not to release the cover for the digital release of the album, preferring to hold it back for the physical release.[25] The "discbox" release of the album includes a lyric booklet, containing additional artwork by Donwood.[23]


Having fulfilled their six-album contract with EMI with the release of 2003's Hail to the Thief, Radiohead stated after completion of In Rainbows that they had not made a decision on how to release their new material. At one point, Yorke hinted at the possibility of releasing singles or EPs rather than an album.[26] However, he ruled out Internet-only distribution because he felt some fans would not have the technological means to obtain the new material.[3] Commenting on the band's relationship with EMI, he said, "We have no record contract as such ... What we would like is the old EMI back again, the nice genteel arms manufacturers who treated music [as] a nice side project who weren't too bothered about the shareholders. Ah well, not much chance of that."[27] Shortly before the band began writing new songs for the album, Yorke told Time, "I like the people at our record company, but the time is at hand when you have to ask why anyone needs one. And, yes, it probably would give us some perverse pleasure to say 'Fuck you' to this decaying business model."[28] Radiohead retained ownership of the album recordings and song compositions for In Rainbows. The download and "discbox" versions of the album are self-released by the band, while for the physical release, the band licenced the music to record labels.[29] The album's licencing agreements for all releases continue to be managed by the band's publisher, Warner Chappell Music Publishing.[29]

On 1 October 2007, Jonny Greenwood announced in a brief post on Dead Air Space, "Well, the new album is finished, and it's coming out in 10 days . . . We've called it In Rainbows".[30] Radiohead released the album as a download available for order from inrainbows.com on 10 October 2007. In a Wired interview, Yorke explained that "every record for the last four—including my solo record—has been leaked. So the idea was like, we'll leak it, then."
