Tom Robbins
Thomas Eugene Robbins (born July 22, 1936 in Blowing Rock, North Carolina) is an American author. His novels are complex, often wild stories with strong social undercurrents, a satirical bent, and obscure details. He is probably best known for his novel Even Cowgirls Get the Blues (1976), which was made into a movie in 1993 directed by Gus Van Sant.

Thomas Eugene Robbins was born in Blowing Rock, North Carolina to George Thomas Robbins and Katherine Robinson. He also has three younger sisters, two of whom are still living.
Robbins lived with his family in Blowing Rock until they settled in Burnsville, North Carolina in 1943. In 1954, Robbins studied journalism at Washington and Lee University in Lexington, Virginia but left after he was ousted from his fraternity for discipline problems. He spent the following year hitchhiking, finally settling in New York as a poet. In 1957 he enlisted in the Air Force after receiving his draft notice and spent two years as a meteorologist in Korea until being discharged in 1959. After he was discharged, Robbins returned to civilian life in Richmond, Virginia.
In 1960, Robbins entered art school at Richmond Professional Institute, which later became Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), and was the editor of the campus newspaper as well as a copy editor for the Richmond Times-Dispatch. Upon graduation, he moved to Seattle to seek a Masters degree at the School of Far Eastern Studies of the University of Washington. While in Seattle, he worked for The Seattle Times and Seattle Post-Intelligencer.

He was a friend of Terence McKenna, whose influence is evident in several of his books. A main character (Larry Diamond) in Half Asleep in Frog Pajamas advocates a theory similar to those of McKenna, involving Psilocybin. In addition, there are striking parallels between one of the main characters of Jitterbug Perfume (Wiggs Dannyboy) and McKenna. He is also an admirer of Indian mystic Osho.[1] He is also on the advisory board of the Marijuana Policy Project. Annualy, Mr. Robbins participates in the Spam Sculpturing Competition as a judge.
He won the Golden Umbrella award at the Bumbershoot Seattle arts festival in 1997.
Robbins has two sons named Rip and Fleetwood Star. He is married to his third wife Alexa D'Avalon and has lived in La Conner, Washington since 1970.

Robbins has written eight novels, and one collection, since 1971. He has also written numerous short stories and essays.[2]



