Robert McKee
Robert McKee, born 1941, is a creative writing instructor who is widely known for his popular "Story Seminar", which he developed when he was a professor at the University of Southern California. McKee is the author of a "screenwriters' bible" called Story: Substance, Structure, Style and the Principles of Screenwriting. Many of Hollywood's active screenwriters claim him as an inspiration. Rather than simply handling "mechanical" aspects of fiction technique such as plot or dialogue taken individually, McKee examines the narrative structure of a work and what makes the story compelling or not. This could work equally as well as an analysis of any other genre or form of narrative, whether in screenplay or any other form, and could also encompass nonfiction works as long as they attempt to "tell a story".

Robert McKee began his theater career at the age of 9, playing the title role in a community theater production of ‘Martin the Shoemaker’. He continued acting as a teenager in theater productions in his hometown of Detroit, Michigan. Upon receiving the Evans scholarship, he attended the University of Michigan and earned a Bachelor’s degree in English Literature. While an undergraduate, he acted in and directed over thirty productions. McKee’s creative writing professor was the noted Kenneth Thorpe Rowe.
After completing his Bachelor of Arts degree, McKee toured with the APA (Association of Producing Artists) Repertory Company, appearing on Broadway alongside Helen Hayes, Rosemary Harris and Will Geer. He then received the Professional Theater Fellowship and returned to Ann Arbor, Michigan to earn his Master’s degree in Theater Arts.
Upon graduating, McKee directed the Toledo Repertory Company, acted with the American Drama Festival, and became Artistic Director of the Aaron Deroy Theater. From there he traveled to London to accept the position of Artist-in-Residence at the National Theater where he studied Shakespearean production at the Old Vic theater. He then returned to New York and spent the next seven years as an actor/director in Broadway.

After deciding to move his career to film, McKee attended Cinema School at the University of Michigan. While there, he directed two short films: A Day Off, which he also wrote, and Talk To Me Like The Rain, adapted from a one-act play by Tennessee Williams. These two films won the Cine Eagle Award, awards at the Brussels and Grenoble Film Festivals, and various prizes at the Delta, Rochester, Chicago and Baltimore Film Festivals.
In 1979, McKee moved to Los Angeles, where he began to write screenplays and work as a story analyst for United Artists and NBC. He sold his first screenplay Dead Files to AVCO/Embassy Films, after which he joined the WGA (Writers Guild of America). His next screenplay, Hard Knocks, won the National Screenwriting Contest, and since then McKee has had eight feature film screenplays purchased or optioned, including the feature film script Trophy for Warner Bros. (the film, however, was not produced). In addition to his screenplays, McKee has had a number of scripts produced for television series such as Quincy, M.E. (starring Jack Klugman), Columbo (starring Peter Falk), Spenser: for Hire and Kojak (starring Telly Savalas).

In 1983, as Fulbright Scholar, McKee joined the faculty of the School of Cinema-Television at the University of Southern California (USC), where he began offering his famous STORY Seminar class. A year later, McKee opened the course to the public, giving a 3-day, 30-hour intensive class to sold-out audiences around the world.
Since 1984, more than 50,000 students have taken McKee's course, at various cities around the world: Los Angeles, New York, London, Paris, Sydney, Toronto, Boston, Las Vegas, San Francisco, Helsinki, Oslo, Munich, Tel Aviv, Singapore, Barcelona and more.

Robert McKee is among the most widely known screenwriting lecturers. According to his web site, McKee's former students include 26 Academy Award winners, 125 Emmy Award winners, 19 WGA (Writers Guild of America) Award winners and 16 DGA (Directors Guild of America) Award winners (all participated in McKee's course before or after winning their award; not all were awarded for writing). He was profiled by Bob Simon of ’60 Minutes’ for CBS news, and CNN recently did a profile and review of McKee and the Story Seminar. The actors Kirk Douglas and John Cleese have taken his seminar.[1]
McKee continues to be a project consultant to major film and television production companies, as well as to major software firms (Microsoft, etc.) and television news departments.[2] In addition, several companies such as ABC, Disney, Miramax, PBS, Nickelodeon and Paramount regularly send their entire creative and writing staffs to his lectures.[1]
In 2000, McKee won the International Moving Image Book Award for his book STORY (Regan Books/HyperCollins). The book, currently in its 19th printing in the United States and its 14th printing in the UK, has become required reading for film and cinema schools at Harvard, Yale, UCLA, USC and Tulane universities.[2][3] The book was on the Los Angeles Times best-seller list for 20 weeks.
McKee’s other credits include writing and presenting the BBC series Filmworks, the Channel Four series ‘Reel Secrets’, the BAFTA Award-winning J’ACCUSE CITIZEN KANE television program which he wrote and hosted, and the writing of Abraham, the four-hour mini-series on Turner Network Television (TNT) which starred Richard Harris, Barbara Hershey and Maximilian Schell.

McKee is often quoted [1] as saying that Casablanca (1942) is the greatest screenplay of all time. Several critics tackle this by saying that Casablanca actually had no tight script, or hardly any script that was taken in a serious account by the director. A line in the IMDb trivia article on Casablanca states:
In response, McKee claims that Ingrid Bergman had misunderstood the situation: the ending was known, but was kept secret from her until the last possible minute.
McKee has been criticized by Joe Eszterhas, for being someone who teaches screenwriting without ever having a script of his made into a film.[4][5] McKee has responded to such criticisms, saying, "The world is full of people who teach things they themselves cannot do", while admitting that even though he sold all of his written screenplays, he still lacks their screen credit since they were only optioned and not produced by the studios.[1] McKee is listed, however, as the screenwriter of the movie, "Abraham."
While McKee's work might appear to be a fresh approach to story structure, many of the ideas he discusses have been around since Aristotle, and notably appear in the work of William Archer, John Howard Lawson and Alexander Mackendrick.
McKee also appears and is criticized in several works, for example, Missionnaire by French author Joann Sfar and Charlie Kaufman's Adaptation (2002 movie).

In the Charlie Kaufman-penned, 4-time Academy Award-nominated movie Adaptation., McKee's character was portrayed by the Emmy Award-winning actor Brian Cox, who was McKee's personal choice for the role. In the movie, the desperate-for-a-draft screenwriter Charlie Kaufman (played by Nicolas Cage) reluctantly goes to McKee’s course, but then – after being “shaken” by McKee’s tough-style response to his claim that “nothing happens in the real world” – Kaufman asks McKee to meet in person to discuss his failure to write the film adaptation he is working on.
Though the story depicts McKee as little more than an amalgam of hack cliches on the subject of screen writing, Charlie's half-witted, slacker brother Donald uses the knowledge obtained attending the famous seminar to write a spec script he then sells for an astonishing amount of money through his brother's own agent. The film itself then rather cynically concludes with the very hackneyed bang up ending McKee is ridiculed for recommending, as well as a voice-over epilogue in which—by means of voice-over narration--Cage's Kaufman character admonishes himself for disobeying a cardinal rule of McKee's to avoid voice-over narration at all costs.




