Karas (anime)
Karas (鴉－KARAS－ ,Karasu?, lit. The Raven) is a six-part original video animation of the henshin genre (a kind of Japanese superhero). Tatsunoko Production produced it to commemorate its 40th anniversary of anime production. Each Karas episode was first televised in Japan as a pay-per-view program from March 25, 2005, to August 3, 2007, before being released onto DVDs. Manga Entertainment compiled and released these episodes as two feature length, direct-to-DVD films for the English market.
Karas tells the story of Otoha, a former yakuza, living in a fictional version of Shinjuku, Tokyo populated by humans and yōkai (Japanese spirits). He is one of the titular karas, humans appointed as superpowered agents of the land. Able to transform into a car, an aircraft, and an armored crusader; the skilled swordsman is to stop his corrupt predecessor, Eko, from taking over Tokyo. Supporting characters such as Eko's former henchman, Nue; the yōkai; and Homura, the karas of another city, help Otoha in his quest. A concurrent side story focuses on humans affected by Eko's scheme.
Karas won the Best Original Video at the 2006 Tokyo Anime Award competition, and most reviewers were impressed with the images produced by fusing 2D and 3D art techniques. The story presents themes on the conflicts between cultural traditions and modern society, and the relationship between people. Reviewers, however, found its presentation was too confusing to follow; several of them felt it worsened the show by detracting from the strength of its art.

Karas is set in a fictional version of Shinjuku, Tokyo.[1] The show initially showcased larger areas of Tokyo, but the production team felt other animations have featured these areas too many times.[2] Art designer, Hajime Satō (佐藤 肇 ,Satō Hajime?) created a modern version of the ward infused with a mixture of East Asian cultures. Chinese characters bearing the curves and stylings of the Korean language fill the billboards and signs. Western gargoyles and Singapore's Merlion statues decorate the streets, and the buildings are modeled on Shinjuku structures of 2003 while blending influences from the Shōwa period.[3][4] This Shinjuku is populated by humans and Japanese folklore spirits, yōkai. The humans have become indifferent to the yōkai's presence, and fail to see them as they go about their lives.[5]
The production team envisioned Japanese cities as entities, who require physical agents to execute their will and regulate the activities within them. The concept behind the health of a city is based on traditional Chinese medicine in which the smooth flow of a body's fluids nourishes its internal organs. The team equates yōkai with qi, humans with water, and agents of the city (karas) with blood. They integrated Celtic mythology into their concept for further symbolisms, treating the city as the male (yang); and Yurine (ゆりね ?), the manifestation of its will as female (yin). In contrast, their theory treats the humans and agents as the children of the city and its will, and classifies them as the reproduction system's five major organs. Following the team's vision, the mikuras (evil yōkai) represent the five elements in this system. This idea forms the basis of the relationship between cities and their inhabitants in the show.[6]

Ibira initially pictured Karas as a horror story with a vengeance theme. It had a simple plot similar to the manga, Dororo. The protagonist karas is on a quest, slaughtering mikuras to recover the body parts of his murdered lover. Until he recovers all the parts, he assembles them into a katana to kill the mikuras.[2] The final version of Karas was more of a superhero action story,[7][8] and originally intended for three leading heroes in the same vein as the Japanese period drama, Sanbiki ga Kiru!. The characters Otoha, Nue, and the human detective Kure were the leads but the final version primarily focused on Otoha.[9] The presentation of Karas differs in several ways from typical anime. The show maintains a serious tone and never indulges in slapstick, exaggerated facial expressions, or super deformed characters.[10] It avoids heavy expositions. Dialogue tends to be short and viewers have to infer what is going on based on very little presented information.[11] The team had left out substantial amounts of information from the show, printing them in a booklet of the final DVD package.[6]
The main plot centers around the confrontation between Otoha and Eko. Character interactions are mainly with yōkai and mikuras. The show employs a cold open featuring a battle between two karas before the title sequence is shown. Eko kills the unnamed karas, and the expositions at the end of the fight announces Eko's plan to remake Tokyo. The story moves ahead three years, introducing Nue as he arrives in Shinjuku to free his brother from Eko's hold, and Otoha in a hospital from heavy injuries sustained in a burglary revealed in later flashback sequences.[12] The early parts of the show proceed in a "mikura of the week" fashion as Otoha (as a karas) and Nue separately fight against Eko's minions.[7][8] When the mikuras attack hospitals across the ward to locate Otoha's body, Otoha and Nue work together to kill the weasel-like Kamaitachi. The spider-like Tsuchigumo, however, abducts Otoha's Yurine and deprives him the power to turn into a karas. After splitting up with Otoha, Nue attacks Eko's base. He ruptures the chambers holding Yurine and Eko's body, but falls into Eko's trap. Eko kills Yurine and reveals capturing Nue completes the final part of his plan. Otoha rescues his fellow burglar, Reiji (礼治 ?) from their former yakuza gang. Yakuza reinforcements, however, kill Reiji, and Otoha kills the gang leader, his brother-father in retailiation. Homura (炎 ?), another city's karas rescues Otoha from the remaining yakuzas. When Eko launches the last stage of his plan and ravages Tokyo with metal tentacles, Otoha ends up among human refugees in a shelter the chief of police had commissioned.
A side story takes place within the main plot, focusing on the humans affected by the ongoing events. The characters, Minoru Sagisaka (鷺坂 実 ,Sagisaka Minoru?) and Narumi Kure (呉 鳴海 ,Kure Narumi?) are detectives in Shinjuku's Intervention Department. Portrayed in a similar manner to Mulder and Scully of The X-Files, they investigate serial murders for supernatural evidence.[13][14] Mikuras kill and suck the blood of these victims to replenish their strength,[14] but no one except Sagisaka seriously believes in supernatural involvement. Sagisaka is bent on vindicating his daughter, Yoshiko (よし子 ?) who has been committed to a psychiatric hospital for claiming a mikura committed the mass murder she had survived.[5] Sagisaka's and Kure's investigation brings them to the survivor of another attack, Hinaru (ヒナル ?). Sato had created her to represent the best qualities of rural migrants looking for better opportunities in the big cities.[15] When Eko starts the last part of his plan; Kure, Hinaru, and the Sagisakas arrive in the shelter Otoha is in.
The chief of police reveals himself as Ushi-oni and starts eating the humans trapped in the shelter. Yoshiko recognises him via flashbacks as her attacker. Sagisaka sacrifices himself to push his daughter away from Ushi-oni's attack. Otoha confronts Ushi-oni to defend the others, and suffers heavy injuries. A climatic sequence depicts Otoha's collapse from his wounds; but his conviction in protecting the city and its inhabitants, resurrects his Yurine.[16] Yurine restores Otoha as a karas and he slays Ushi-oni. While karas from other cities observe the showdown between Otoha and Eko, Homura steps in to help Otoha. Eko conjures and merges with a huge white dragon. Otoha breaks off to respond to Nue's call. He carries out Nue's request to kill him and his brother, depriving Eko of his new power source and stopping his entire scheme.[17] Confronting the depowered Eko on equal terms, Otoha's final stroke shatters Eko's blade and deals him a mortal blow. Eko claims Otoha will understand his reasons after 400 years as a karas. Despite defending his human body and Yurine from soldiers ordered to shoot them, Otoha proclaims as Tokyo's appointed agent, he will protect all its inhabitants no matter their inclination. While Hinaru stays behind in Shinjuku as it is being rebuilt, Kure and Yoshiko have had enough and leave for the countryside.

—Keiichi Sato, director
The production team intended karas to be more than a mere henshin hero. Unlike the vengeful protagonist in Mazinger Z, the hero of Karas embodies the spirit of the city, and acts for the city's interest instead of his own. Screenwriter Shin Yoshida (吉田 伸 ,Yoshida Shin?) sets up a dualism of this idea in the form of two karas characters; one who believes events are leading to a revolution, and the other viewing them as simply the passing of an era.[18] Manga Entertainment also promoted the hero in Karas as "a cyberpunk version of the Crow".
Karas is the title for the city's appointed agents. Capable of transforming into automobiles and aircraft,[5] they are suits of armor animated by human souls infused into them through Yurine's chanting of a Shinto prayer.[6] Director Sato told his animators to enhance the karas' dark nature by drawing their faces in shadows. Fight scenes involving karas take place mostly in dark settings shrouded with steam or lit with spotlights. Animators touched up film frames by hand, creating an effect different from cel-shaded animation.[20] To make the karas more menacing, they highlighted the eyes as if light bulbs were shining through them, a technique inspired by the suitmation practice of using light bulbs for the eyes of costumes.[21] Producer Takaya Ibira (伊平 崇耶 ,Ibira Takaya?) explained the presence of ravens in Tokyo and the Tower of London, inspired him and Sato to model the agents of the city after them. He stated ravens are believed to be omens of good and bad in superstitions, and they always seem to be watching over the cities. This resonated with his view of the raven in the story Noah's Ark, which cursed Noah as it scouted for land. The presence of ravens all over Tokyo led Ibira to notice the same of cats and conceive the Yurines as catgirls.[2]
Otoha (乙羽 ?) is the protagonist of Karas. Yoshida wrote out Otoha as a character dark in history and actions, breaking the traditional mold of a Japanese hero. He based his idea on his observation of Shinjuku, questioning what sort of a hero a ward exuding an aura of terror and happiness would produce.[18] He portrayed Otoha as the product of incest between his mother and his brother who is the local yakuza boss. Otoha's back-story states him as suffering from congenital insensitivity to pain which lends the character a merciless reputation as his brother's enforcer.[12] The initial concept of Otoha was much darker, casting him as a serial killer who hunts down mikuras to retrieve his lover's body parts.[22][2] Japanese actor Sohkoh Wada (和田 聰宏 ,Wada Sōkō?) marked his voice acting debut as Otoha.[1] His English counterpart is voice actor Steve Staley.
Eko Hoshunin (鳳春院 廻向 ,Hōshun'in Ekō?) is the antagonist to Otoha. His back-story states he was the karas of Tokyo since the Edo period.[4] In events before the start of the show, Eko turned his back on his duties, and started a plan to revitalize the city and its yōkai. He attracted several yōkai to be his cybernetic followers and intended to subjugate the humans. An Oedipus complex forms the basis for his motive. He views Tokyo as a father figure, and his Yurine as a mother figure; and aims to supplant the city's role in this relationship.[6] Eko was a nameless character in the initial draft and known as "Another karas" with a different appearance, although his prosthetic left leg is retained for the final version.[22] Voice actors Takahiro Sakurai and Matthew Lillard provided Eko's Japanese and English voices respectively.
The Mikura (御座 ?) are yōkai who became Eko's minions and replaced their bodies with machinery. Its members consist of Suiko (水虎 ?), Wanyūdō, Tsuchigumo, Kamaitachi, and Ushi-oni. Ibira and Sato chose them to be villains, linking the act of the karas as agents of the city killing these folklore creatures to traditional Japanese exorcism.[2] The chimera-like Nue, however, is a tragic anti-hero who learned of Eko's plans and turned against him.[15] Sato thought up the cybernetic angle to surprise the Japanese who perceive immaterial yōkai to lack physical threat.[2] Creature designer Kenji Andō (安藤 賢司 ,Andō Kenji?) adapted the yōkai designs from artist Toriyama Sekien's illustrated folklore books, Gazu Hyakki Yakō. The few yōkai with prominent roles in the show underwent greater changes. Andō drew Amefurikozō (雨降り小僧 
