Cato Institute
The Cato Institute is a libertarian think tank headquartered in Washington, D.C.
The Institute's stated mission is "to broaden the parameters of public policy debate to allow consideration of the traditional American principles of limited government, individual liberty, free markets, and peace" by striving "to achieve greater involvement of the intelligent, lay public in questions of (public) policy and the proper role of government." Cato scholars conduct policy research on a broad range of public policy issues, and produce books, studies, op-eds, and blog posts. They are also frequent guests in the media.
The Cato Institute is non-partisan, and its scholars' views are not consistently aligned with either major political party. For example, Cato scholars were sharply critical of the Bush administration on a wide variety of issues, including the Iraq war, civil liberties, education, health care, agriculture, energy policy, and excessive government spending. However, on other issues, most notably Social Security,[1][2] global warming,[3][4] tax policy,[5] and immigration,[6][7][8][9][10] Cato scholars had praised Bush administration initiatives. During the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Cato scholars criticized both major-party candidates, John McCain[11][12] and Barack Obama.[13][14]

The Institute was founded in San Francisco, California in 1977 by Edward H. Crane and initially funded by Charles G. Koch. The Institute is named after Cato's Letters, a series of British essays penned in the early 18th century by John Trenchard and Thomas Gordon expounding the political views of philosopher John Locke. The essays were named after Cato the Younger, the defender of republican institutions in Rome. Libertarian Murray Rothbard was a founding member of the institute's board and is credited with suggesting the name. He later came into sharp disagreement with other members, resulting in his dismissal in 1981.[15][16] Cato relocated to Washington, D.C. in 1981, settling first in a townhouse on Capitol Hill.[17] The Institute moved to its current location on Massachusetts Avenue in 1993.
In November 2002, shortly after Cato's website was named the "Best Advocacy Website" by the Web Marketing Association, the Alexa ratings service issued a report saying that it was "the most popular think tank site over the past three months," receiving a total of 188,901 unique visitors during the previous month of September.[18]

The Cato Institute publishes the periodicals:
Cato's Letter,
Cato Journal,
Regulation,
Cato Supreme Court Review,
Cato Policy Report,
policy studies.
Some of Cato's books include Social Security: The Inherent Contradiction, In Defense of Global Capitalism, Voucher Wars, You Can't Say That!: The Growing Threat to Civil Liberties from Antidiscrimination Laws, Peace and Freedom: A Foreign Policy for a Constitutional Republic, Restoring the Lost Constitution, and Reclaiming the Mainstream: Individualist Feminism Reconsidered.[19][20]
Cato published Inquiry Magazine from 1977 to 1982 (before transferring it to the Libertarian Review Foundation), and Literature of Liberty from 1978 to 1979 (before transferring it to the Institute for Humane Studies, where it was ended in 1982). They also had a monograph series called "Cato Papers".

The Cato Institute's work is rooted in the classical liberal tradition of John Locke and Adam Smith. Cato scholars base their work on a variety of philosophical and religious perspectives. Three Nobel Laureates have been particularly influential to the Cato Institute's work. Milton Friedman first proposed the concept of school choice, which is now promoted by Cato's Center for Educational Freedom. He also was an influential advocate for a number of policy proposals supported by Cato scholars, including monetarism and the end of the draft and the drug war. F.A. Hayek's ideas about spontaneous order and the importance of the price mechanism have been fundamental to Cato scholars' work on a wide variety of topics. And James M. Buchanan's work in public choice economics have been fundamental to Cato scholars' critiques of many government programs.
Many strands of thought have influenced the work of various Cato scholars. For example, a 2005 pamphlet by Dan Griswold, Cato's director of trade policy studies, made the case for individual liberty from a Christian perspective.[21] Cato policy analyst Will Wilkinson has argued that the case for liberty can best be made by combining key insights of Friedrich Hayek and John Rawls, a political philosopher whose egalitarian ideas are often thought of as antithetical to libertarianism.[22] Ayn Rand's philosophy of Objectivism has also had a particularly strong influence on the Cato Institute. Objectivists share with other libertarians a respect for individual liberty, free markets, and limited government. In 1997, David Boaz, Cato's executive VP, wrote of his belief that all Objectivists are necessarily libertarians.[23]

In the years immediately following the Republican Revolution, the Cato Institute was often seen as a standard-bearer of the U.S. conservative political movement. Barry Goldwater and Ronald Reagan, credited with reshaping and rejuvenating the Republican Party, and key contributors to the late-20th century conservative movement, were heavily influenced by libertarian ideals.
Despite this, the Cato Institute officially resists being labeled as part of the conservative movement because "conservative smacks of an unwillingness to change, of a desire to preserve the status quo".[24] Such tensions have become increasingly evident in recent years, as the Institute has become sharply critical of current Republican leaders.[25] The growing division may be attributable to Republican officeholders' growing support of policies promoting government intervention in the economy and society, increased budgetary spending, and neoconservative foreign policies.
Cato scholars have also been strongly critical of the expansion of executive power under President George W. Bush[26], and his management of the Iraq War.[27] In 2006 and 2007, Cato published two books critical of the Republican Party's perceived abandonment of the limited-government ideals that swept them into power in 1994.[28][29] For their part, only a minority of Republican congressmen supported President George W. Bush’s 2005 proposal to partially privatize Social Security, an idea strongly backed by the Institute. And in the 109th Congress, President Bush's immigration plan—which was based on a proposal by Cato scholar Dan Griswold[30]—went down to defeat largely due to the eventual opposition of conservative Republican congressmen.[31]
Cato President Ed Crane has particular scorn for neoconservatism. In a 2003 article with Cato chairman emeritus William Niskanen, he called neoconservatism a "particular threat to liberty perhaps greater than the ideologically spent ideas of left-liberalism."[32] As far back as 1995, Crane wrote that neoconservatives "have a fundamentally benign view of the state," which Crane considers antithetical to libertarian ideals of individual freedom.[33] Cato's foreign policy team have frequently criticized neoconservative foreign policy.[34]

As with the conservative side of the political spectrum, there are some similarities between progressives and libertarians, including their shared values of peace, tolerance, equality, and individual liberty. Interest in such possibilities has increased as a result of disillusionment with the Bush administration and the Iraq War. However, there has been continuing disagreement over the basis on which such co-operation might take place.
Cato's scholars advocate positions that are appealing to many on the left-hand side of the American political spectrum, including support for civil liberties, liberal immigration policies, equal rights for gays and lesbians [35] [36], and peace. An early example of this effort was the launching of Inquiry Magazine, which was aimed at liberals who shared libertarians' skepticism about concentrated state power. Similarly, Cato scholars advance many positions that those on the left do not favor, such as smaller government, school choice, and second-amendment rights.
More recently, in 2006, Markos Moulitsas proposed the term Libertarian Democrat to describe his progressive position, suggesting that libertarians should be allies of the Democratic Party. Replying, Cato vice president for research Brink Lindsey agreed that libertarians and liberals should view each other as natural ideological allies[37], but noted continuing differences between mainstream progressive views on economic policy and Cato's "Jeffersonian philosophy".
The Jeffersonian philosophy that animates Cato's work has increasingly come to be called "libertarianism" or "market liberalism." It combines an appreciation for entrepreneurship, the market process, and lower taxes with strict respect for civil liberties and skepticism about the benefits of both the welfare state and foreign military adventurism.[38]
However, there remain significant differences between progressives and libertarians on issues such as taxes, gun ownership, and school choice. As a consequence, the Cato Institute has criticized a number of decisions made by President Obama, just as it has regularly criticized decisions made by former President Bush.

Relations between the Cato Institute and Objectivist organizations have not always been cozy. Ayn Rand scorned the nascent libertarian movement[39], and her intellectual heir, Leonard Peikoff, has followed her lead, refusing to associate with libertarian organizations, Cato included. Other Objectivist organizations, notably the Atlas Society, have been more friendly. At an October 2007 event to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the publication of Atlas Shrugged, Cato President and Founder Ed Crane stated that he and all the senior leadership of the Cato Institute consider themselves Objectivists.[40]
