Emir Kusturica
Emir Kusturica, OF (Serbian Cyrillic: –ï–º–∏—Ä –ö—É—Å—Ç—É—Ä–∏—Ü–∞; IPA:†[Ààku.stu.ri.tsa]) (born 24 November 1954 in Sarajevo, SR Bosnia and Herzegovina, Yugoslavia) is a Serbian filmmaker, actor and musician living in Serbia. He has converted to the Serbian Orthodox faith from Bosnian Muslim and considers himself a Serb.[1] He won the Palme d'Or at Cannes twice (for When Father Was Away on Business and Underground), he is also a recipient of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.[2][3] On 8 September 2007, Kusturica became a UNICEF National Ambassador for Serbia, alongside Ana Ivanoviƒá, Jelena Jankoviƒá and Aleksandar ƒêorƒëeviƒá.


After graduating from the Film Faculty of the Academy of Performing Arts in Prague (FAMU) in 1978, Kusturica began directing made-for-TV television shorts in former Yugoslavia. He made an auspicious feature-film debut in 1981 with Do You Remember Dolly Bell?, which won the prestigious Golden Lion for Best First Work at that year's Venice Film Festival. From 1981 to 1988 he was a lecturer at the Academy of Performing Arts in Sarajevo (Akademija Scenskih Umjetnosti) and art director of Open Stage Obala (Otvorena scena Obala).
His second feature film, When Father Was Away on Business (1985), earned a Palme d'Or at Cannes, five Yugoslavian Oscar equivalents, and was nominated for an American Academy Award for Best Foreign Film. He wrote the screenplays for both Do You Remember Dolly Bell? and When Father Was Away on Business in collaboration with Abdulah Sidran. In 1989, Kusturica earned even more accolades for Time of the Gypsies, a penetrating but magical look into gypsy culture and the exploitation of their youth.
In 1986-1988 Kusturica played bass guitar in Zabranjeno pu≈°enje, a rock band from Sarajevo (Bosnia and Herzegovina).
The musician and composer Goran Bregoviƒá created music for several Kusturica's films, including Time of the Gypsies, Arizona Dream (feat. Iggy Pop) and Underground.

Kusturica continued to make highly regarded films into the next decade, including his American debut, the absurdist comedy Arizona Dream (1993) and the Palme d'Or-winning black comedic epic, Underground (1995).
Underground, scripted by Du≈°an Kovaƒçeviƒá, reflects the history of Yugoslavia since the beginning of WWII (and similar to all ex-communist countries) to the last horrible events in Balkan countries. Behind the comedy is hidden the pain of whole generations, which have suffered WWII, The Cold War, the war in Yugoslavia, the treachery of their own leadership, the fall. The film shows us the reality, as seen by those who feel unlimited love for their country and culture.
In 1998, he won the Venice Film Festival's Silver Lion for Best Direction for Black Cat, White Cat, an outrageous, farcical comedy set in a Gypsy (Romany) settlement on the banks of the Danube. The music for the film was composed by Belgrade-based band No Smoking Orchestra, formed by Zabranjeno Pu≈°enje vocalist Nele Karajliƒá. In 1999 they recorded a new album, Unza Unza Time, produced by the Universal record company, as well as a music video, directed by Emir Kusturica. The band continued touring around the world under the name Emir Kusturica & No Smoking Orchestra, though he played a rather minor musical role in the band.


Emir Kusturica is involved with the musical group No Smoking Orchestra. Their website and more information can be found at [2].

When New York Times interviewed Emir at the beginning of the Bosnian War, he said: "I am a living illustration of Bosnian mixing and converting," "My grandparents lived in eastern Herzegovina. Very poor. The Turks came and brought Islam. There were three brothers in the family. One was Orthodox Christian. The other two took Islam to survive."[6]
On ƒêurƒëevdan (St. George's Day) in 2005 Emir was baptised into the Serbian Orthodox Church as Nemanja Kusturica (–ù–µ–º–∞—ö–∞ –ö—É—Å—Ç—É—Ä–∏—Ü–∞) in Savina monastery near Herceg Novi, Montenegro.[7][8] To his critics who considered this the final betrayal of his Bosnian Muslim roots, he replied that: "My father was an atheist and he always described himself as a Serb. OK, maybe we were Muslim for 250 years, but we were Orthodox before that and deep down we were always Serbs, religion cannot change that. We only became Muslims to survive the Turks."[7][9]




Do You Remember Dolly Bell?†‚Ä¢ When Father Was Away on Business†‚Ä¢ Time of the Gypsies†‚Ä¢ Arizona Dream†‚Ä¢ Underground†‚Ä¢ Black Cat, White Cat†‚Ä¢ Super 8 Stories†‚Ä¢ Life Is a Miracle†‚Ä¢ Maradona†‚Ä¢ Promise Me This
Actors†‚Ä¢ Directors†‚Ä¢ Films A-Z†‚Ä¢ Films by year†‚Ä¢ Cinematographers†‚Ä¢ Composers†‚Ä¢ Editors†‚Ä¢ Producers†‚Ä¢ Screenwriters†‚Ä¢

