Farscape
Farscape is an Australian-American science fiction television series filmed in Australia and produced for the Sci-Fi Channel and the Nine Network. The series was conceived by Rockne S. O'Bannon and produced by Jim Henson Productions and Hallmark Entertainment.[1] The Jim Henson Company was largely responsible for the various alien makeup and prosthetics, and two regular characters (the animatronic puppets Rygel and Pilot) are entirely Creature Shop creations.
Although the series was under contract for five seasons, it was abruptly canceled after production had ended on its fourth season, effectively ending the series on a cliffhanger. Co-producer Brian Henson later secured the rights to Farscape, paving the way for a four-hour miniseries entitled Farscape: The Peacekeeper Wars, which Henson himself directed. New webisodes are being produced by SCI FI, and are expected to debut in 2009. A new comic book miniseries is due for release in November 2008 that will be in the continuity of both the series and the upcoming webisodes.[2]

Farscape features a widely diverse and eclectic ensemble of characters who are all escaping from corrupt authorities called Peacekeepers. The protagonists live inside a giant space-dwelling creature named Moya, which serves as their ship. In the first episode, they are joined by the main character, John Crichton (Ben Browder), a modern-day American astronaut who accidentally flew into the entrance of a wormhole near Earth (a wormhole being a shortcut through space covering an unknown amount of distance). On the same day, another stranger is picked up by Moya: a stranded Peacekeeper named Aeryn Sun (Claudia Black) who appears human (these same two actors later starred together in two seasons of Stargate SG-1). Despite his best intentions, John does make a few major enemies; the primary of these is known as Scorpius. There are a few stand-alone plots, but the show centers on the unfolding events surrounding John's battle against Scorpius, John's special abilities with wormholes, and on another front, with his relationship (or lack thereof) with Aeryn.

Farscape first ran on the Canadian YTV channel[citation needed], then in the U.S. on the Sci-Fi Channel. Originally conceived in the early 1990s by Rockne S. O'Bannon and Brian Henson under the title Space Chase, the series was initially titled "Far Horizon" when it aired in Australia. The series is told in a serialized format, with each episode involving a self-contained story while contributing to a larger storyline. Nearly the entire cast originates from Australia and New Zealand, with the exception of Ben Browder, who is an American actor.
Farscape's characters frequently make use of Bowdlerized slang such as "frell" and "dren" as a substitute for English expletives. This language may have been inspired by the word "Frak", a term popularized by Battlestar Galactica.



The initial antagonist of the series is Bialar Crais (Lani Tupu), a Peacekeeper Captain who relentlessly hunts Moya and its crew. He is driven by the death of his brother, a pilot who accidentally collided into Crichton's ship when it exited the wormhole. At the end of the first season, Crais is usurped by Scorpius (Wayne Pygram), a rival commander of the Peacekeeper force. Scorpius is a hybrid created from the DNA of a human-like Sebacean and a reptilian Scarran. He is obsessed with extracting the secret of wormhole technology from Crichton.
As the series progressed, a revolving cast of characters joined the crew of Moya. During the first season, the crew is joined by Stark (Paul Goddard), a member of the faceplate-wearing Banik species. Stark has the power to ease the pain and suffering of others, traits which make him a highly-sought test subject for the Peacekeepers. Jool (Tammy MacIntosh) is an orange-haired academic who appears sporadically throughout seasons three and four. When frightened or enraged, her hair blazes red and her screams can melt metal. Noranti (Melissa Jaffer) is an elderly, three-eyed alien and a skilled herbalist. At 293 years old, she occasionally appears to be senile and falls asleep at inconvenient times. Captain Meeklo Braca (David Franklin) usually serves as a subordinate to most of the series' villains, feigning obedience as he steadily rises up the ranks.
In the third season, a new antagonist arrives in the form of Commandant Grayza (Rebecca Riggs), a manipulative Peacekeeper who aims to put an end to Scorpius' wormhole research. Ruthless and ambitious, she has a gland implanted in her chest that secretes a substance which bends men to her will. Sikozu (Raelee Hill) is a brilliant Kalish woman who joins the crew at the beginning of the fourth season. Hard-edged and dangerous, she gradually allies herself with Scorpius.

John Crichton is an IASA astronaut working on an experimental project dubbed "Farscape". During a test flight above Earth's orbit, a wormhole suddenly appears, hurling John to a distant part of the universe. Upon his exit, Crichton's space module clips another craft, a fighter, which then spins out of control and hits a nearby asteroid, killing the fighter's pilot. Crichton is set adrift, but is noticed by and rescued by a large nearby ship, named Moya, which has been hijacked by escaped convicts of various alien species. Early on, the crew must contend with a belligerent regime known as the Peacekeepers. Originally set up as a law enforcement agency, by the start of the series they have degenerated into a mercenary force.
In the premiere episode, they are pursued by Officer Aeryn Sun, a Peacekeeper commando sent to recapture Moya. During the chase, Aeryn's ship is caught up in the wake of Moya's propulsion system and she is taken captive. After Aeryn is bought aboard, it is discovered that the pilot who hit Crichton's ship was Tauvo Crais, brother of the Peacekeeper Captain Bialar Crais. Shortly thereafter, the vengeful Bialar boards Moya, promising to catch and dissect his brother's killer. When Aeryn comes to Crichton's defense, Crais deems her "irreversibly contaminated" from her contact with alien species. Stripped of her rank and guaranteed the death penalty upon her return, Aeryn is forced to flee along with the rest of the prisoners, providing the basis for a long-running story arc.
The first season episode "Nerve" marks the introduction of Scorpius, a ruthless Peacekeeper commander. The sole survivor of a breeding program to produce a Peacekeeper/Scarran hybrid, Scorpius must wear a protective coolant suit at all times to prevent himself from overheating. (This is due to the nature of his biological existence: his Scarran genetics generate great amounts of heat, while his Sebacian side has an overwhelming weakness to it, and can even die from it.) Upon discovering that Crichton's brain is implanted with secrets of wormhole technology, Scorpius vainly tries to extract it, only to find that even Crichton cannot access it. Scorpius later usurps the position of Bialar Crais, becoming the main antagonist for the remainder of the series.
The love-hate relationship between Crichton and Aeryn features prominently throughout each season. Aeryn, who was once considered an exemplary soldier, has difficulty dealing with any emotions, regarding them as "weakness". For his part, Crichton is torn between his bond with Aeryn and his steadfast desire to return to Earth. This dilemma is uniquely dealt with in the third season, when an accident leaves Crichton "twinned" — split into two clones. Crichton is effectively split into two identical beings; neither can be definitively called a copy, and are both equally John Crichton. When the crew is forced to split up in order to mislead a Peacekeeper battalion, one Crichton resumes his task of getting home, leaving the other Crichton stranded with Aeryn. This proves to be an unhappy development after Aeryn confesses her love to Crichton, only to watch him die keeping wormhole technology from the Scarrans. Though the remaining Crichton survives, the trauma of this event creates a rift between himself and Aeryn.

Production of a four-hour miniseries began in December 2003, written by creator Rockne S. O'Bannon and Executive Producer David Kemper and directed by Brian Henson. In May 2004, the Sci-Fi Channel, now owned by NBC Universal, announced that it would run a two-episode conclusion titled Farscape: The Peacekeeper Wars that was intended to wrap up the Season Four cliffhanger and additionally tie up some general elements of the series. The miniseries first aired on Sunday October 17, 2004.
Interestingly, Henson refers to the four hours as episodes 4.23-4.26, though the New South Wales Film Office refers to the production as a '2 x 2 hour telemovie.' Production of the miniseries ended in March 2004 and, in addition to the announced airing on the Sci-Fi Channel in the U.S., was also scheduled to be broadcast in the UK on Sky1 on January 16 and 23, 2005, and by Five on March 8. The Peacekeeper Wars earned a 1.7 household Nielsen rating, drawing 1.96 million viewers and making the Sci Fi channel the #1 non-sports cable network for people aged 25-54 and 18-49 for the time period over the two nights.[3]
Early fan speculation hoped that high Nielsen Ratings for The Peacekeeper Wars miniseries would prove the viability of renewing the series, however the continuation as a new weekly series seemed unlikely, though miniseries are possible, as are feature films. Brian Henson has stated on many occasions that he would like to bring the Farscape saga to the big screen. Fan efforts are now pointed in that direction. In October 2005, Farscape entered syndication in the U.S., airing on Superstation WGN and on a variety of local, cable, satellite and broadcast affiliates.


Between 2000-2002, Farscape won two Saturn Awards for Best Syndicated/Cable TV Series and Best TV Actor (Browder). Additionally, in 2002, it received nominations for Best TV Actress (Claudia Black as former soldier Aeryn Sun) and Best Supporting TV Actor (Anthony Simcoe as the Luxan warrior Ka D'Argo) and Best Supporting TV Actress (Gigi Edgley as the pixieish rogue Chiana).
On July 14, 2005, Farscape: The Peacekeeper Wars received an Emmy Nomination for "Outstanding Special Visual Effects For A Miniseries, Movie Or A Special." In 2007, over four years after its completion, Farscape was named as #4 on TV Guide's list of "The 30 Top Cult Shows Ever".[4]

In September 2002, the Sci-Fi Channel (then-owned by Vivendi Universal) unexpectedly opted to withdraw its funding of the fifth season, canceling the show. While there was much fan criticism of this decision, the Sci-Fi Channel concluded that the series was too expensive to renew, as ratings had declined during the fourth season.[5] Fans mounted a massive letter, phone, and e-mail campaign, hoping to restore the show or transfer it to another network. Early plans to scrap the sets after production were postponed after news of the cancellation broke, partly as a result of the fan campaign. The sets were instead put in storage pending a possible future revival of the show.[5][6]
Cartoonist Bill Amend, creator of the syndicated comic strip FoxTrot, addressed the series' cancellation in an October 8, 2002 strip wherein the character Jason Fox petitioned to have the SciFi channel renew Farscape. Soon after the strip ran, Amend remarked that it "generated more e-mails from readers than anything else I've done in the past. I had no idea that so many people owned computers, even. I shudder to think what the mail boxes at the Sci-Fi Channel must be like these days."[7]
Farscape's cancellation received considerable notice by news media.[8][9] Thanks to the attention generated by the fan campaign, various financial backers in Europe offered their support to Brian Henson, and in 2004, The Jim Henson Company produced a four-hour mini-series to wrap up the series storyline.

Following the series' cancellation, Ben Browder and Claudia Black were both cast as series regulars on Stargate SG-1 during its final two seasons.[10] In the 200th episode, Black's character Vala Mal Doran pitches an idea for a movie to a producer, who immediately recognizes it as The Wizard of Oz. He advises her that if she is going to rip something off, it should be something more obscure. This leads into a parody of Farscape, with Black reprising her role of Aeryn Sun, and various SG-1 characters dressed as D'Argo, Stark, Chiana, and Rygel. Daniel Jackson (Michael Shanks) stands in for John Crichton, an in-joke referencing the sexual tension between Vala and Daniel on SG-1. Shanks was originally intended to play Stark, with Browder reprising the role of Crichton, but the parts were switched the day before filming at the behest of the actors.[11] The scene also parodies the wide array of invented swear words used in the show. When the scene switches back to the real world, the producer replies that he has "no idea what that is", likely referring to Farscape's relative obscurity. Coincidentally, the announcement of Stargate SG-1s own cancellation was made shortly after this episode ran.[12]


AD Vision originally issued Farscape in volumes which they later combined into box sets. Production of Season One box sets was discontinued after the licensing rights were ceded to Sony, who have chosen not to re-release. Due to the prohibitive price of the completed sets, the series was later re-released as individual volumes under the "Starburst Edition" heading. The Region 2 and Region 4 box sets contain Seasons 1-4 as well as the Peacekeeper Wars television movie.

In January 2008, seasons 1 and 2 were made available for download through Apple's iTunes Store for customers in the United States. Season 3 was added in March 2008, with Season 4 following in May. The episodes can be purchased individually or as entire seasons.

On July 15, 2007 it was announced that Farscape would return in ten webisode installments. The episodes are expected to be a few minutes long each and may eventually be broadcast on the Sci Fi Channel. The webisodes were to have been launched as early as fall 2007.[13][14][15] In an interview with TV Guide, Brian Henson stated that the webisodes will be 3-6 minutes long and may feature D'Argo Sun-Crichton. TV Guide also reported that 
