Scrubs (TV series)
Scrubs is an Emmy and Peabody Award-winning American comedy-drama that premiered on October 2, 2001, on NBC. It was created by Bill Lawrence and is produced by ABC Studios (previously known as Touchstone Television).
The show follows the lives of several employees of Sacred Heart, a teaching hospital. It features fast-paced dialogue, slapstick, and surreal vignettes presented mostly as the daydreams of the central character, Dr. John Michael "J.D." Dorian. The show's title is a play on surgical scrubs in addition to “scrubs” being slang for the new and inexperienced.[1]
The seventh season of Scrubs started on October 25, 2007.[2][3] No episodes were shown between December 6, 2007, and April 10, 2008, because of the 2007–2008 writers strike.[4] The season concluded on May 8, 2008, ending the series' run on NBC. On January 6, 2009, the new season of Scrubs premiered on ABC.[5]
The one-hour season (possibly series) finale of Scrubs will air on May 6, 2009 on ABC. The episode title is "My Finale" and many guest stars will return, such as some of the characters' former patients, and J.D.'s brother Dan will appear in both parts of the episode. The Janitor's real name is scheduled to be revealed in the finale as well.[6]

Most episodes feature multiple story lines thematically linked via voice overs by main character and narrator Dr. John Michael "J.D." Dorian, played by Zach Braff. According to Lawrence, "What we decided was, rather than have it be a monotone narration, if it's going to be Zach's voice, we're going to do everything through J.D.'s eyes. It opened up a visual medium that those of us as comedy writers were not used to."[7] The show is shot with a single-camera setup instead of a multiple-camera setup more typical for situation comedies.[7]
The broad comedy is often counterbalanced by more serious scenes, as Lawrence notes: "One of the things we thought early on was [if] we occasionally showed actual patients and actual people dying and things with emotional stakes, working in single camera, that it might be enough to combine with broad comedy."[7]
At the end of most episodes, J.D. summarizes the story's theme in a sequence of shots that show how it has affected each of the characters. Scrubs has been advertised as "half as long as ER and twice as funny." The series has repeatedly featured guest appearances by movie actors not generally seen on episodic television, such as Colin Farrell, Heather Graham and Brendan Fraser.


The show's narrator and main character is John "J.D." Dorian (Zach Braff), a young attending physician, who begins the series as a staff intern. He develops a close friendship with fellow intern and later private practice physician Elliot Reid (Sarah Chalke); their relationship becomes romantic on several occasions. Elliot is driven by a neurotic desire to prove her abilities to her family (in which all of the males are doctors), her peers, and herself. J.D.'s best friend is Dr. Christopher Turk (Donald Faison), a surgical attending physician. Turk roomed with J.D. at college and medical school, and the two have an extremely close relationship, which is described in season 6 as "Guy Love". During the course of the series, Turk marries Carla Espinosa (Judy Reyes), the hospital's head nurse, who acts like a mentor to interns, often hiding their mistakes from their attending doctor. [8] Carla is prone to overreaction and compulsively tells her friends how to go about their lives.
Two other characters play senior roles in the hospital. Dr. Percival Ulysses "Perry" Cox (John C. McGinley) was the senior attending physician at Sacred Heart and the hospital's Residency Director before becoming the new Chief of Medicine in season eight. J.D. considers Cox his mentor despite the fact that Cox routinely criticizes and belittles him. Cox frequently suggests that this harsh treatment is intended as conditioning for the rigors of hospital life. Ken Jenkins plays Dr. Bob Kelso, Sacred Heart's Chief of Medicine until the end of the seventh season when he is forced to step down from residency when the board finds out about his age. Kelso is cold, heartless and cruel, driven primarily by the hospital's bottom line rather than the well-being of patients. However, it is occasionally suggested that he has a softer side, and that his cruelty is a means of coping with the years of hard decisions he has been forced to make, stating that when he became Chief of Medicine he thought he'd be "the man". Instead he very quickly realized that the harsh decisions made him unpopular, however, he had to continue his "evil" facade to keep the hospital running smoothly.
The hospital custodian is known as "Janitor" played by Neil Flynn. An incident in the pilot episode establishes an adversarial relationship between him and J.D., which persists throughout the series. This tends to take the form of the Janitor pulling mean-spirited pranks on J.D.




Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of Scrubs, on ABC.


On November 5, 2007, the Writers Guild of America went on strike, which put the production of the show on hold. When the strike started, only eleven of Scrubs' eighteen planned seventh season episodes had been completely written.[23] Lawrence refused to cross any WGA picket lines to serve any of his duties for the show, so ABC Studios had non-WGA members finish episode twelve, which the studio had unsuccessfully pressured Lawrence to rewrite as a series finale prior to the strike.[23]
During the strike, NBC announced that The Office and Scrubs would be replaced by Celebrity Apprentice. NBC later announced that they would leave Scrubs on hiatus for the time being and fill the 8-9pm timeslot with various specials and repeats.[24]
Episode 11 was eventually filmed[25], although Lawrence was absent. Filming of episode 11 was disrupted by picketers. It was believed that Lawrence had tipped the picketers off about the filming schedule, although these beliefs turned out to be false as Lawrence quickly drove to the set to "keep the peace."[25]
After the strike ended, Lawrence announced that the final episodes of Scrubs would be produced although, at the time, he was unsure where or how they would be distributed.[26]
On February 13, 2008, NBC announced that Scrubs would resume with new episodes, along with other comedy series on April 10, 2008 at 9:30/8:30c on NBC.[27] The season finale aired on May 8, 2008,[28] although that particular episode was originally intended to air as episode 9 of the season.

Amid strike-induced doubt involving the final episodes of Scrubs, on February 28, 2008, The Hollywood Reporter reported that ABC was in talks with corporate sibling ABC Studios with the aim of bringing Scrubs to ABC for an eighth season of 18 episodes,[29] despite both Lawrence's and Braff's protests that the seventh season would definitely be the last.[25] Just hours later Variety reported that NBC was lashing out and threatening legal action against ABC Studios.[30] However, McGinley confirmed that he had been told to report back to work on March 24, 2008 to begin production for another season.[31] On March 12, 2008, McGinley was also quoted as saying that the show's long-rumored move from NBC to ABC was a done deal, [32] and that Scrubs would air on ABC during the 2008-2009 TV season as a midseason replacement. [33]
On March 19, 2008, Michael Ausiello of TV Guide reported that although nothing is "official", the Scrubs cast was to report back to work the following Wednesday for work on a season "unofficial" as yet. [34] Zach Braff posted in his blog on MySpace, on April 28, 2008, that an eighth season consisting of 18 episodes was under production but that he could not say where it will be aired.[35] He then stated, on May 7, 2008, that the May 8, 2008 episode would be the final NBC-aired episode of Scrubs,[36] which was followed by a bulletin on his MySpace, on May 12, confirming that Scrubs' eighth and final season will be moving to ABC.
On May 13, ABC announced that Scrubs would be a midseason replacement, airing Tuesday nights at 9PM ET.[37][38] Steve McPherson, ABC's President of Entertainment, also stated that additional seasons of Scrubs beyond the eighth could be produced if it performs well.[39] In late November ABC announced Scrubs would resume with back-to-back episodes on January 6, 2009 at 9PM EST.[40]
In February 2009, ABC announced that Scrubs would be moving from its original Tuesday nights slot at 9 PM to Wednesday nights at 8 PM. It will be the lead-in show for Better Off Ted.
In a recent video blog, Bill Lawrence stated that Season 8 will be more like the first few seasons in tone, with more of a focus on more realistic and dramatic storylines and the introduction of new characters.[41] Courteney Cox joined the cast as the new Chief of Medicine, Dr. Maddox, for a three-episode arc.[42][43] The eighth season included web episodes and will be the first "Scrubs" season broadcast in high definition.[44]
Zach Braff has confirmed he will leave the series after the 8th season,[45] although this will not necessarily end the show.[46][47] Judy Reyes, like Braff, has also decided to leave Scrubs after season 8 so she can move on to films and probably Broadway. Bill Lawrence will leave the show as well.[48] Reyes indicated to the Globe that ABC, which picked up the long-running show from NBC earlier this year, could not afford to match the Scrubs stars' pay demands.[49] ABC and Lawrence have suggested that the show could continue past 2009 with a new cast.[50
