Hafez
Khwāja Šamsu d-Dīn Muḥammad Hāfez-e Šīrāzī (Persian: خواجه شمس‌الدین محمد حافظ شیرازی), known by his pen name Hāfez (born 1315 Shiraz-died 1390 Shiraz) was the most celebrated Persian lyric poet and is often described as poet's poet. His Divan is to be found at the home of most Iranians who recite his poems by heart and use as proverb and saying to this day. His life and poems have been the subject of so much analysis, commentary, and interpretation and had influenced the course of post-fourteenth century Persian lyrics more than anyone else has.[1]
The major theme of his ghazals are love, the celebration of wine and intoxication, and exposing the hypocrisy of those who have set themselves up as guardians, judges, and examples of moral rectitude.
His presence in the lives of Iranians can be felt through Hafez-reading (Persian: فال حافظ), frequent use of his poems in Persian traditional music, visual art and Persian calligraphy. His tomb is a masterpiece of Iranian architecture and visited often. Adaptations and translations of Hafez poems exist in major languages.

Despite his profound effect on Persian life and culture in general and his everlasting popularity and influence, details of his life are far from known and particularly about his early life there is a great deal of more or less mythical anecdote. Some of the early tazkeras (biographical sketches) mentioning Hafez are often considered unreliable or even purely fictitious.[2] One early document discussing Hafez' life is the preface of his Divān written by an unknown (whose name has been suggested to be Moḥammad Golandām) contemporary writer of Hafez.[3] These are reproduced and edited further in the preface of the generally accepted authoritative modern edition of Hafez's Divān known as Qazvini-Ḡani by Moḥammad Qazvini and Qāsem Ḡani.
On the dates of birth and death of Hafez, there are many different proposals by different scholars. However most of the modern scholars, following a proposal by M. Moin, agree that Hafez was born in 1315 and, following an account by Jami, consider 1390 as Hafez date of death.[3]
Judging from his poetry, he must have had a good education, or else found the means to educate himself. Scholars generally agree on the following:
His father Baha'u d-Dīn, who migrated from Isfahan to Shiraz in the time of Atabeks of Fars, is said to have been a coal merchant who died when Hāfez was a child, leaving him and his mother in debt. It seems probable that he met with Attar of Shiraz (Zayn al-Attar), a somewhat disreputable scholar, and became his disciple. He is said to have later become a poet in the court of Abu Ishak, and so gained fame and influence in his hometown. It is possible that Hafez gained a position as teacher in a Qur'anic school at this time.
In his early thirties, Mubariz Muzaffar captured Shiraz and seems to have ousted Hāfez from his position. Hāfez apparently regained his position for a brief span of time after Shah Shuja took his father, Mubariz Muzaffar, prisoner. But shortly afterwards Hāfez was forced into self-imposed exile when rivals and religious characters he had criticized began slandering him. Hāfez fled from Shiraz to Isfahan and Yazd for his own safety.
At the age of fifty-two, Hāfez once again regained his position at court, and possibly received a personal invitation from Shah Shuja, who pleaded with him to return. He obtained a more solid position after Shah Shuja's death, when Shah Mansour ascended the throne for a brief period before being defeated and killed by Tamerlane.
When an old man, Hafez apparently met Tamerlane to defend his poetry against charges of blasphemy.
It is generally believed that Hāfez died at the age of 69. His tomb is located in the Musalla Gardens of Shiraz (referred to as Hāfezieh).
Hāfez took ear to his immense popularity during his lifetime and agreed with many others (then and now) when he wrote:
Translation by Edward Granville Browne

Many semi-miraculous mythical tales were woven around Hāfez after his death. Four of them are:
With Samarkand being Timur's capital and Bokhara his kingdom's finest city. "With the blows of my lustrous sword," Timur complained, "I have subjugated most of the habitable globe... to embellish Samarkand and Bokhara, the seats of my government; and you, would sell them for the black mole of belle of Shiraz!" Hāfez, so the tale goes, bowed deeply and replied "Alas, O Prince, it is this prodigality which is the cause of the misery in which you find me".
So surprised and pleased was Timur with this response that he dismissed Hafez with handsome gifts.
Translated by Clarence Streit

Not much acclaimed in his own day and often exposed to the reproaches of orthodoxy, he greatly influenced subsequent Persian poets and has become the most beloved poet of Persian culture. It is said that if there is one book in a house where Persian is spoken, it will be the Dīwān of Hāfez.[citation needed] Much later, the work of Hāfez would leave a mark on such important Western writers as Ralph Waldo Emerson and Goethe. His work was first translated into English in 1771 by William Jones.
There is no definitive version of his collected works (or Dīwān); editions vary from 573 to 994 poems. In Iran, his collected works have come to be used as an aid to popular divination. Only since the 1940s has a sustained scholarly attempt - by Mas'ud Farzad, Qasim Ghani and others in Iran - been made to authenticate his work, and remove errors introduced by later copyists and censors. However, the reliability of such work has been questioned (Michael Hillmann in Rahnema-ye Ketab, 13 (1971), "Kusheshha-ye Jadid dar Shenakht-e Divan-e Sahih-e Hafez"), and in the words of Hāfez scholar Iraj Bashiri.... "there remains little hope from there (i.e.: Iran) for an authenticated diwan".
The history of the translation of Hāfez has been a complicated one, and few English translations have been truly successful, in large part due to the fact that the figurative gesture for which he is most famous is ambiguity, and therefore interpreting of him correctly requires intuitive perception. Most recently, The Gift: Poems by Hafez the Great Sufi Master, a collection of poems by Daniel Ladinsky published in 1999 by Penguin Books, has been both commercially successful and a source of controversy. Ladinsy does not speak or read Persian, and critics such as Murat Nemet-Nejat, a poet, essayist and translator of modern Turkish poetry, have asserted that his translations are Ladinsky's own inventions. [4]
Though Hāfez’s poetry is influenced by Islam, he is widely respected by Hindus, Christians and others. The Indian sage of Iranian descent Meher Baba, who syncretized elements of Sufism, Hinduism and Christian mysticism, recited Hāfez's poetry until his dying day.[5]
The (instructive) poetry of Sufi schools (for reasons shared with other hermetic schools), liberally employ metaphorical language to mask the real meaning intended for a select audience, under a strict pedagogical spiritual regime in which the seeker is (sometimes literally) subject to the pir "master".
Hāfez' poetry is no exception in this regard and is heavily laced with coded phrases (wine, wind, hand), objects and instruments (cups, reeds, harps), places and occupants (tavern, winekeeper, cup-bearer), and of course a variety of flowers and birds (rose, narcissus, nightingale) etc.
Various content matter directly fix the semantic context of his work in both the Abrahamic traditions and Scripture, and, related metaphysical schools (specially references to the Magi). The cup, cup-bearer, wine and the tavern are frequent features of his poetry. Hāfez also clearly subscribes to a notion of apparent and hidden (occult) 'Teaching', and in one part, even claims "he was crucified for disclosing secrets". One aspect of the genius of his work then was his ability to weave such understanding in verses that afforded a variety of meaning, from the base (debauchery) to the sublime (drinking the holy wine and entering into holy intoxication.)
An interesting and meaningful aspect of his work is that each poem contains his name. Sometimes Hāfez expresses an opinion, and sometimes, the learned voice of the meter instructs the author: "Oh Hafez, when you learn that your concern is the Wine and not the Cup, then will you become a King in both Realms".
Hāfez expressed a strong statement regarding the illusory nature of our earthly existence. This existence is generally coded veeraaneh or "the ruins", symbolizing the ultimate end of materiality. He then paints a picture of the seeker, himself, having 'homes' in both 'the ruins' and in the other realm. As a mystic, Hāfez is a very interesting figure, displaying a restlessness in conjunction with his innate (spiritual) repose, which was literally manifested in his life in both his obsession (with the Houri of the ruins, Shakeh Nabat) and his steadfast resolve on the path. That he expects discipline from himself (and in his station of mystic tutorage of his readers) is clear: "Do not complain to us! The Kingdom for he who will work for it".
The following ghazal (# 360 per Mr. Shahriari) is a fitting summation of the 'works' of Hafez by Hafez himself, indicating a clear goal and function to his poetic output -- the office of the said activity being in the MeyKhaaneh (the tavern) -- and the happy news of the achievement of his primary purpose -- "returning" to his "home" and "birthplace" -- with help from the "minister" of the "king" of his Vataan (or nation):
گر از این مـنزل ویران بـه سوی خانـه روم
دگر آن جا کـه روم عاقـل و فرزانـه روم
زین سـفر گر به سلامت به وطـن باز رسـم
نذر کردم کـه هـم از راه بـه میخانـه روم
تا بگویم که چه کشفم شد از این سیر و سلوک
بـه در صومـعـه با بربـط و پیمانـه روم
آشـنایان ره عـشـق گرم خون بـخورند
ناکـسـم گر بـه شکایت سوی بیگانه روم
بـعد از این دست من و زلف چو زنـجیر نـگار
چـند و چـند از پی کام دل دیوانـه روم
گر بـبینـم خـم ابروی چو مـحرابـش باز
سـجده شـکر کـنـم و از پی شکرانه روم
خرم آن دم کـه چو حافـظ بـه تولای وزیر
سرخوش از میکده با دوست به کاشانـه روم

The meaning behind the poetry of Hāfez must, as with all art, be decided by the patron and observer of the work. Though credited as being "The Interpreter of Mysteries," there remain many mysteries regarding Hāfez that have yet to be solved. As the poet himself had said:
One of Hāfez' greatest fondnesses was for wine, so when the Muzaffarids captured Shiraz in 1353 and declared prohibition it is no surprise that Hafez wrote a mournful elegy for the loss:
Translation by Edward Browne
Four years afterward, finding prohibition unfeasible for the wine-loving people of Shiraz, the ruler Shah Shuja repealed that act and for that reason Hafez immortalized his name in verse.
Of course, Hāfez' fondness for wine was overshadowed by that of love:
Translation by Shahriar Shahriari.
As with many poets, there are also allusions to love for a beautiful boy, though it is not always clear whether these are based on life or on literary convention (ultimately derived from Theocritus):
Translation by Henry Wilberforce-Clarke
In the year 2009 the Italian professor Giovanni Maria D'Erme translated the Hafez Shirazi's collection of poems into Italian.[6]

Twenty years after his death, an elaborate tomb (the Hafezieh) was erected to honor Hafez in the Musalla Gardens in Shiraz. The current Mausolem was designed by André Godard, French archeologist and architect, in the late 1930s. Inside, Hafez's alabaster tombstone bore one of his poems inscribed upon it - "profoundly religious at last" (Durant)[citation needed]:
Translation by Gertrude Bell
Nowadays, the Hāfezieh is visited by millions each year and regarded by countless people to be a veritable shrine.[citation needed]

