Shithead (card game)
Shit head is a card game in which the aim is to lose all of one's cards.
The game, and variations of it, are popular in many countries, particularly amongst teenage and twentysomething travellers. The basic structure of the game generally remains similar, but there are often variations in the special roles that the rules assign to particular cards.

Shit head is a popular card game for two to six players in which players aim to avoid being the last player to get rid of his/her cards. The winner of the game is usually considered unimportant, although in some cases the winner is considered to be "redeemed," i.e. previous losses become annulled.
The loser is referred to as shit head, must deal the next game and, in theory, can be forced to do the bidding of his/her fellow players. This usually means a forfeit of the group's choice (which is often alcohol or drug related but need not necessarily be). Shithead status is thus passed from losing player to losing player after each game. They can also be forced to wear a hat (often with the word shithead on it).
Generally speaking there is no major disadvantage to losing, except perhaps the loss of pride or being "stitched up" by consuming alcohol, for example. Some variations do not feature these attributes, and the object is simply to get rid of one's cards.

There are many variations of the rules, and there is no universally accepted set. (See the Values of Cards section, below)

From a standard, shuffled deck of 52 cards (jokers may also be included), each player is dealt a number of 'face down cards' in a row. (The number varies with player number and variation - often three per player, but sometimes more if there are fewer players.) They are not allowed to see or change these cards. On top of the 'face down cards', they are dealt the same number of 'face up cards'. A different number (usually three, but this also varies) is again dealt to each player (face down), and this becomes the player's 'hand'. Players are then allowed to switch the cards in their 'hand' with their 'face up cards' in an attempt to produce a strong set of 'face up cards' for later in the game. For details of what constitutes a strong set of cards, read on. The dealer places the remaining cards face-down in what we shall refer to as the 'deck'. Players will lay their cards in turn in what we shall refer to as the 'pick up pile' or 'pile'.

After the cards have been dealt, players lay cards in turn onto the pick up pile, starting with the first player to claim he/she holds the lowest (weakest) card in his/her hand.
The lowest card will vary depending on the rules in force, but should be agreed on before play begins. It should be defined as the weakest card in the set - and is typically a 4. Red cards are considered lower than black cards - meaning that, for example, play might commonly start with a red 4 rather than a black 4. If two players hold a red 4 as the lowest card, the red hearts card is deemed to be lower. If no red or black version of the lowest card is held, players (led by the dealer) should consider the next lowest card, and so on.
A variation is the player to the left of the dealer plays first. Since the dealer is most likely the 'shithead' of the previous game, they are the one to play last. This adds 'punishment' to being the prior games 'shithead' or loser.
Another variation is that the first player to declare "4's down" upon seeing his/her face-up or hand cards gets to start the play. A further variation of this, based on player agility, sees the first player to physically put down the weakest card is seen as having started play.

Each player must lay a card (or two or more cards of the same number) equal to or higher in value than the one at the top of the pick up pile, then draw cards from the deck so they have at least 3 cards in their hand (unless the deck has run out of cards or they already have 3 or more cards in their hand). If they cannot play a card, they must pick up the pick-up pile (put it in their hand) and end their turn.
Some variations allow a player who has no moves to draw one card from the deck, instead of picking up the "pick up pile". Once the deck is gone, the player must pick up the pile instead. (In this variant, at the beginning of the game, the top of the deck is turned over instead of the lowest card being played. If a player cannot play on their first turn, and draws from the pile, they may swap this card with a face-up card. This is repeated until the player plays a card from their hand, or picks up the pile (can't draw from the deck or play a card from their hand).)
Some variations allow the player to "match" the drawn card, that is, if the card they draw has the same value as those the player has just played, he or she may play the newly drawn card as well. This is sometimes dependant on speed, with the ability to "match" the drawn card becoming void if the next player has already lain a card.
When players have no more cards in their hand, and the deck is empty, they may proceed to play from their three face up cards. The cards laid form a pile which must be picked up by any player who cannot beat the most recently played card. (Note also that it is quite common to allow players to pick up this pile even if they "do" have a card in their hand that would allow them to beat the most recently played card. This arguably increases the level of strategy involved in the game). Picking up the pile can often put a player at a great disadvantage when many cards have been played as they will have more cards to lose than other players. Even so, it is still possible to quickly recover from this handicap.

Aside from the basic order of play, the core aspect of Shithead is the 'Special Cards' (Sometimes called Magic Cards). These vary greatly depending on local or personal variation, though the core of the rules remains the same. There are a number of Special Cards which recur in most versions of the game, though which card has this effect can vary.
Players should pick, choose and try a set of rules as they see fit. It is possible to form a game which involves a considerable amount of strategy, or choose a simpler version which relies on luck. Below are details of the most popular Special Cards.
Joker: The Joker card is not always used, but where it is, it is the highest non-special card in the game, and can be beaten only by another Joker, or a special card which can be played on anything. A variation to the use of the Joker exists. This variation sees the Joker can be played on any card. Once played, all players pass the cards in their hand to the player to their right. The impact of this rule is that players which have played all their cards and would normally be out of the game, can see themselves back in the game.
Aces: Aces are high (meaning that they are stronger than the Jack, Queen and King). Depending on the variation being played, Aces can either be used to nominate another player to go out of the normal sequence of play or have no particular effect. When used to nominate another player the player who played the card chooses the next player irrespective of the normal order. They can be beaten by certain special cards, detailed below.
Burn Cards: Sometime called 'Nuke Cards'. These are cards that remove the existing pile from play permanently. Burn cards are usually either four cards of the same value played in a row (not necessarily by the same player) or one specific card (Invariably a 10) that can be played on its own. Burn cards can typically be played on any card. For example the sequence Q, K, K, burn card means that the pile will be put to the side (face down). An example of the four-card burn would be: Player 1 - J; Player 2 - J,J; Player 3 - J. The pile would be put to the side (face down) and player 3 would have another go. In some variations burn cards may not be played on the reverse card.
Reverse Card: The Reverse Card reverses the standard rules of ascending card value on the pile for one turn, meaning the next player must play an equal or lower card on their next turn - or another reverse card (does not re-reverse back to usual play, but rather causes the reverse to persist to the next player in the sequence of play). This is particularly useful when high cards are known to dominate opponent's hands. For example consider the sequence 4, 5, 5, 7 (where 7 is the reverse card) which means that the next person must lay lower (or equal to) 7 - usually they would need to lay a higher or equal card. Again, rules vary widely, but a choice must be made as to whether the reverse card can be played on 'anything' or in ascending order on cards which are lower which is more common, or whether the next player must play a card of a lower value than the card underneath, known as 'transparent sevens', so for "4, 5, 5, 7" a player would have to play card lower than a 5. For example, while it is certainly always legal to play 4, 5, 5, 7 it is not, depending on the house rules in force, always legal to play Q, K, K, 7.
Permanent Reverse Card This has the same effect, but is permanent, until another card of the same value is played.
Play Again Card This card enables the player who played it to have another (mandatory) turn. The Play Again card can be played on any card.
Skip Card: When one of these cards is played the next player's turn is skipped, and play continues with the following player. Optionally, when two or more of this card are played at the same time the number of consecutive players that are skipped may be equal to the number of cards played (e.g. when three Skip cards are played, the next three players miss their turn). Depending on the number of players, this card may result in the player who laid the cards missing his or her own turn, or taking another turn immediately. This can be cumulative: a skip card played upon one other has a double effect, played on two others skips three turns, etc. This can be used where if a second, third or fourth skip card played skips two, three or four turns, regardless of any cards played between the skip cards.
Rotation Card (Jack or 9) Changes the rotation of the game (e.g. clockwise to counterclockwise). Playing more than one rotation card may or may not have the same effect as playing one.
Mirror/Transparent Card: The mirror card simply 'mirrors' whatever card is below it in the pile, meaning the next player has to beat the card which is played before the mirror card. Mirror cards also apply to special cards; for example a mirror card played on a reverse card means that the mirror card then acts as a reverse card. The mirror card can typically be played on any card. A Mirror card may not be a part of a four-card burn (5, 5, Mirror card, 5 would not count, nor would 5, 5, Mirror, 5, 5), however this is not the case in some variants. Commonly, 8 or 3 is used as a mirror card.
Restart Card: The restart (or sometimes 'reset') card (often a 2) can be played on any card and 'resets' the pack so that the next player will be able to play any card (even the weakest).
Pick-Up / Vengeance card: The pick-up card (often a 3) can be played on any card to make the next player in turn pick up the pile (except the pick-up card itself). The only cards that can top this are:
In some games, the player who plays this card can choose who must pick up the pile. In this case, the name Vengeance Card is more often used.
Based on these simple rules players can create arrangements for many styles of game, ranging from extremely tactical to complete luck (as in Blind Shithead (See Variations, below)).
An example Shithead special card arrangement could be:
2 - Reset Card
3 - Transparent Card
7 - Reverse Card
8 - Skip Card
10 - Burn Card
This is one of the more common arrangements, and is a good version to start learning shithead. Some versions have almost exclusively special cards and keeping track of which card does what can become very difficult , and can detract from the game rather than making it more interesting. In creating their own arrangements, players should be sparing with which special cards they choose to include, and in assigning the effects to cards they should choose a spread of high and low cards to take special effects.

Once a player has lost all of their hand cards and the deck is empty they then play their face up cards. At this stage, other players have the advantage of seeing which cards are available to the player. This means they are often able to play cards that cannot be beaten in order to make an opponent pick up the pile.
Once a player has lost their face up cards they are left with their three 'blind' face down cards of which they can choose any to play (one at a time). If the blind card does not beat the card on the pile, the user must pick up the pile as before. Depending on the agreed rules, players "either" must or need not reveal a blind card if it does not beat the previously played card. Further variations do not require that all three face-up cards must be played before face-down cards can be selected, but only the face-up card which covers the face-down card the player wishes to use. This adds a gambling element to play as players must decide whether to use a face-up card which will guarantee success, or risk using a face-down card and keeping the high-value face-up card for when it may be more useful. It is another example of the versatility of the rules of the game: players can select and agree on which aspects they like for purposes of fun and strategy.
When players are using their face up or face down cards and cannot go (i.e. they cannot or do not want to beat the previous pile card), they should pick up the pile and the card that they would have played from the face up/face down cards. However, some variations hold that this is only true for the face-down cards.
Play continues in this fashion until only one player has cards remaining.

Some other possible rules include:
Few versions include more than 2 or 3 of these additional rules (if any) as they can become extremely confusing, and break the flow of the game. Experienced Shithead players generally do not recommend these rules to beginners.

There are a number of variations which change the core rules of the game, unlike the additional rules, these can make the game drastically different.

This variation sees the entire deck split evenly between players in facedown piles. The first player takes their top card and this becomes the start card, then the next player takes their top card and play continues in this fashion. When someone is forced to pick up they must get rid of their hand before they continue eliminating their facedown pile.

In this version of Shithead, each player is dealt 9 cards all into their hand. The player may then look at all of their cards, and select 3 to play as their starting hand, 3 as their open cards on the table and 3 to pass to the player to their left to be their face down cards on the table. In this version, games can last much longer, as players invariably have to pickup when they reach their blind (face-down) cards, as other players have given them their worst cards.

In this version of Shithead, the rules are as standard apart from one fact. Of the 6 cards that are dealt into your hand, you must lay the first 3 dealt as your top tabled hand, no matter what the value.

The game was first documented in 1994 by David Parlett under the bowdlerized name "Shed" and is found in a large number of countries - it is known to have been played before Parlett took note of it, however. This game may be known as Flowerpot in the Channel Islands, Shaffat in Buckinghamshire, Danish Bastard in Germany and Putresyan in Philippines. In Norway and the United Kingdom this game is also known as Idiot. In America it is sometimes called "Not Euchre" or "Palace."
There is also a similar Finnish game paskahousu. Another Scandinavian name for the game is "skitt-gubbe". Another similar game is Mau Mau, popular in Germany and Brazil, among other areas.

A video game version with social networking elements, all accessible in web browser has been developed at www.shitheadonline.com. It allows the player to create its own rule variations.
The site is noted as currently being in beta testing and an invite-only community at present.

A limited videogame version called Shed is available for Xbox 360, released in the Community Games channel. It features offline play against up to 3 AI opponents, and online drop in/drop out play over Xbox Live against up to 3 human/AI opponents.

The novelty version of shithead the card game depicts an assortment of hilarious poo related characters, it includes the rules of Shithead plus variations, a unique poo carry case and a comical poo stained headpiece for the crowning of the Shithead.


