McGillicuddy Serious Party
Sovereign
Governor-General
House of Representatives
Speaker of the House of Representatives
Political parties
Prime Minister
Cabinet
Elections
Māori politics
Foreign relations
The McGillicuddy Serious Party (McGSP) operated as a satirical political party in New Zealand politics during the late 20th century. For many years, from 1984 to 1999, McGillicuddy Serious provided "colour" to New Zealand politics to ensure that citizens not take the political process too seriously. The party's logo, the head of a medieval court jester, indicated McGillicuddy Serious's status as a joke party.
The party stood candidates in the 1984, 1987, 1990, 1993, 1996 and 1999 General Elections; the 1986, 1989, 1992, 1995, 1998 Local Body elections;[1] along with various local-body and parliamentary by-elections and even some university student-association elections.[2]
The McGSP gained its highest ever total of votes in New Zealand's last first-past-the-post (FPP) election in 1993, when it stood candidates in 62 out of 99 electorates and received 11,714 votes: or 0.61% of all votes cast.

The McGillicuddy Serious Party formed in 1984[3] in Hamilton as the political arm of Clan McGillicuddy (established in 1978). Members of the Clan had previously stood as candidates in the 1983 local-body elections in the Waikato,[3] but the McGSP came together in time to contest the 1984 General Election. The party had a strong Scottish theme, with the kilt considered one of the party's symbols. Initially many candidates were students at the University of Waikato. Candidates also included a number of street-performers and comedic musical groups, such as the Big Muffin Serious Band.

After discovering that he had some (rather obscure) relationship to the Stuart pretenders, Clan McGillicuddy in 1979 advanced Bonnie Prince Geoffie the Reluctant as replacement for Queen Elizabeth II.[4] The Clan's armed wing, the McGillicuddy Highland Army (McGHA), attempted to settle the matter by trial by combat, challenging the New Zealand Army to a winner-takes-all pillow-fight; HRH's official armed defenders declined the offer. Armed "pacifist" insurrection using harmless weapons having failed, the Clan reluctantly turned to the ballot-box, contesting general elections from 1984 to 1999. The Clan has not totally give up the fight however, as it still occasionally battles the loyalist forces of Alf's Imperial Army[5], a pro-British pacifist-warfare group which supported The Wizard of New Zealand and which promoted McGillicuddy's rival for the silly-vote, the Imperial British Conservative Party. The two armies' most recent battle was on 2 January 2008.
The party sometimes became the subject of aggression from unexpected quarters — in 1990 Green Party candidate Warrick Pudney challenged his Te Atatu rival to a paper-sword fight in Aotea Square (the fight ended in a declared draw, with both combatants treated for paper-cuts).

At one point the Party selected its electoral candidates through trial by combat, with newspaper swords and water-balloons, the loser of the combat becoming the candidate. In 1990 this policy gave way to one of standing several candidates for the same seat (electoral law forbade one candidate to contest two seats, doubling the chances of election; but permitted a party to have two candidates standing in the same electorate, thus halving their chances). In 1996 a giant game of musical chairs took place in Cathedral Square, Christchurch to select the Canterbury regional electorate candidates. Whoever remained sitting on one of the labelled chairs when the music stopped became the candidate for that seat. Potential candidates for proportional representation ( list) seats vied Cinderella-style by trying to fit into labelled shoes.

The McGillicuddy Serious Party selected its policies on the basis of their absurdity and their impracticality.
Central McGillicuddy Serious policies in every election included a return to a medieval lifestyle, known as the "Great Leap Backwards"[6] and (superficially) the restoration of a monarchy supposedly based on the Scottish Jacobite line, in the name of Bonnie Prince Geoffie "the reluctant". At a deeper level the Party invoked the political system of Tibetan Buddhism, with "stspm" (singularly transferable spirit possession monarchy), used as the justification for the selection of Bonnie Prince Geoffie the reluctant as the undeniable head of the McState. (This embodied the principles stated by the ancient Greeks that "no-one who seeks power should be allowed it"[cite this quote]; Bonnie Prince Geoffie refused consistently and permanently to have anything to do with the authority that this position gave him, and indeed ran for all he was worth and never had anything to do with McGillicuddy Serious ever again. Thus proving his indisputable worthiness for the position.)
Other policies at various times included:

McGillicuddy Serious attracted a surprising level of support, and became one of the larger parties outside parliament. On a number of occasions, particularly following the introduction of the mixed member proportional (MMP) electoral system, pundits predicted that McGillicuddy Serious might actually win parliamentary representation, but this never happened. When the major parties boycotted the Tauranga by-election 1993 in 1993, the McGillicuddy Serious candidate Greg Pittams, (who appeared in nationwide newspapers during this campaign wearing his "emperors new kilt" outfit, comprised of only a shirt and sporran), finished second to Winston Peters... a very, very distant second. Votes for McGillicuddy presumably most often represented protest votes, something that the party encouraged with one of its slogans: "If you want to waste your vote, vote for us."
As time went on, McGillicuddy Serious began to encounter the problem that often appears in joke parties — a debate about exactly how serious it should become. The original founders of the party essentially saw it as "a bit of fun", aimed at providing humour and entertainment. This remained a major part of McGillicuddy Serious throughout its history. Later recruits to the party however, sometimes saw the party's satire in a more serious context, regarding it as a tool with which people could ridicule and challenge the political establishment. In particular a number of anarchists joined the party, seeing it as an antidote to the traditional order and intending to use the party as a vehicle to give anarchist policies a higher public profile. The dichotomy, in essence, grew between "satire for fun" and "satire to make a political point". Many of the party's original members resented what they saw as a usurpation of the party for more avowedly political and overdefined anarchist purposes, and felt that for the party to become openly "anarchist" would thus make some area of politics "off-limits" to satire. They saw this as an anathema. In addition they saw having a clearly identifiable stance as lessening the party's effectiveness as satirists. Other members however, had little problem with the expression of more openly anarchist viewpoints.

The 1999 election campaign proved a disappointment. The McGillicuddy Serious Party gained only 0.15% of the vote, a considerable drop from its previous performances. Shortly after the election, the party disbanded and the Electoral Commission officially deregistered it as a political party.[14] Party leader Graeme Cairns marked the event and did penance for the party's election-loss by placing himself in stocks in Garden Place in Hamilton in December 1999 as disgruntled party members pelted him with rotten fruit.[15]

The following table summarises the party's support in general elections from 1990 onwards.

A number of former McGillicuddy Serious members went on to stand as candidates for "real" parties. Metiria Turei,[16] a Green MP, formerly held McGillicuddy Serious membership, and stood for Parliament as number 27 on the McGillicuddy's candidate list for the 1999 General Election[17]. Other prominent McGillicuddy candidates from this first generation of McGillicuddy electioneering included founder and Party Leader Graeme Cairns, the "Laird of Hamilton"; Mark Servian; KT Julian, a long-time Party Deputy-Leader; Adrian Holroyd; Cecil G. Murgatroyd (who subsequently stood against Australian Prime Minister Bob Hawke under the Imperial British Conservative Party banner)[18]; high-performance engineer and Admiral of the McGillicuddy Highland Navy Aaron Lloyd Franklin; Sam Buchanan; Steve Richards; Donna Demente; and Penny Bousfield.

Some of the party's original members became upset at the cancellation of their lifetime membership. In July 2005 a "McGillicuddy Serious Party" put out a press-release announcing plans to participate in the 2005 General election — one initial policy involving replacing MPs with harmless jargon-generators.[19] A former member put out the press-release without the knowledge of the Clan McGillicuddy's senior members or of the McGSP's former leadership.
After intense discussions within the Clan McGillicuddy, no further press releases appeared, no official party registration took place, and neither the party nor any candidates appeared on the 2005 ballot.
One candidate stood under the McGillicuddy Serious banner in the 2008 general election: Steve Richards, who contested the West Coast-Tasman electorate) and received 259 votes.
