Curse of the Golden Flower
 December 21, 2006
Curse of the Golden Flower (simplified Chinese: 满城尽带黄金甲; traditional Chinese: 滿城盡帶黃金甲; pinyin: Mǎnchéng Jìndài Huángjīnjiǎ), also known literally as When Golden Armour Covers the Entire City, is a 2006 Chinese wuxia film directed by Zhang Yimou.
With a budget of $45 million, it was at the time of its release the most expensive Chinese film to date, surpassing Chen Kaige's The Promise.[3] It was chosen as China's entry for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film for the year 2006;[4] it was not nominated in that category though it did receive a Costume Design nomination.


The title of the movie is taken from the last line of a Tang dynasty poem attributed to the rebel leader Huang Chao, "On the Chrysanthemum, after failing the Imperial Examination" (不第後賦菊/不第后赋菊) or simply "Chrysanthemum":
Due to the film's high profile while it was still in production, its title, which can be literally translated as "The Whole City is Clothed in Golden Armor", became a colorful metaphor for the spring 2006 sandstorms in Beijing and the term "golden armor" (黄金甲, huángjīnjiǎ) has since become a metaphor for sandstorms among the locals.[5]

China, Later Tang Dynasty, 10th Century. On the eve of the Chong Yang Festival, golden flowers fill the Imperial Palace. The Emperor (Chow Yun Fat) returns unexpectedly with his second son, Prince Jai (Jay Chou). His pretext is to celebrate the holiday with his family, but given the chilled relations between the Emperor and the ailing Empress (Gong Li), this seems disingenuous. For many years, the Empress and Crown Prince Wan (Liu Ye), her stepson, have had an illicit liaison. Feeling trapped, Prince Wan dreams of escaping the palace with his secret love Chan (Li Man), the Imperial Doctor's daughter. Meanwhile, Prince Jai, the faithful son, grows worried over the Empress's health and her obsession with golden chrysanthemums. Could she be headed down an ominous path? The Emperor harbors equally clandestine plans; the Imperial Doctor (Ni Dahong) is the only one privy to his machinations. When the Emperor senses a looming threat, he relocates the doctor's family from the Palace to a remote area. While they are en route, mysterious assassins attack them. Chan and her mother, Jiang Shi (Chen Jin) are forced back to the palace. Their return sets off a tumultuous sequence of dark surprises. Amid the glamour and grandeur of the festival, ugly secrets are revealed. As the Imperial Family continues its elaborate charade in a palatial setting, thousands of golden armored warriors charge the palace. Who is behind this brutal rebellion? Where do Prince Jai's loyalties lie? Between love and desire, is there a final winner? Against a moonlit night, thousands of chrysanthemum blossoms are trampled as blood spills across the Imperial Palace.

The primary source for the screenplay (co-written by Director Zhang, Wu Nan and Bian Zhihong) is a renowned Chinese play written by Cao Yu in the 1930s with its story re-worked (by Zhang) to transport it more than a millennium back in time.[1]
At the start of the film, text from the English-language version of the film states that this movie is set in the time of the Tang, in the year 928. However, the Chinese version of the film did not specify a time period and the film's published screenplay indictates it is set during Later Shu of the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period.[2] It should be noted that the story in the film is entirely fictional and has essentially no relation to real history. There are also a number of other inconsistencies with established Chinese history. These include:

The US release garnered a generally positive reception (although tepid comparing to the director's past works). It received a score of 70 out of 100 from film critics according to the review aggregator Metacritic[4] and holds an average rating of 65% by film critics on the review ranking site Rotten Tomatoes.[5] Yahoo! Movies gave the film a B grade based on critical consensus.[6] It has grossed over $78 million worldwide.[7] It was also the third highest grossing non-English language film in 2006 after Apocalypto and Pan's Labyrinth.[8]
Richard Corliss of Time magazine praised the film's lurid operatic aspect and states: "this is high, and high-wire, melodrama...where matters of love and death are played at a perfect fever pitch. And grand this Golden Flower is."[9] Jeannette Catsoulis of The New York Times states: "In Curse of the Golden Flower Mr. Zhang achieves a kind of operatic delirium, opening the floodgates of image and melodrama until the line between tragedy and black comedy is all but erased."[10] Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times describes the film as: "A period spectacle, steeped in awesome splendor and lethal palace intrigue, it climaxes in a stupendous battle scene and epic tragedy" and "director Zhang Yimou's lavish epic celebrates the gifts of actress Gong Li while weaving a timeless tale of intrigue, corruption and tragedy."[11] Andrew O'Hehir of Salon states: "the morbid grandiosity of Curse of the Golden Flower is its own distinctive accomplishment, another remarkable chapter in the career of Asia's most important living filmmaker."[12]
Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post writes: "Zhang Yimou's Curse of the Golden Flower is a kind of feast, an over-the-top, all-stops-pulled-out lollapalooza that means to play kitschy and grand at once" and Hunter furthur states: "It's just a great old wild ride at the movies."[13]
On the other hand, Matt Brunson of Creative Loafing feel that the film was a poor reflection of director Zhang Yimou's acclaimed works in the past.[14] Bruce Westbrook of The Houston Chronicle though praising the film's spectacular visual, states "Visuals alone can't make a story soar, and too often this one becomes bogged down by spectacle..."[15] Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter states the film is "A disappointing misfire from a great director."[16] Gene Seymour of Newsweek states: "Curse of the Golden Flower is to the feudal costumed adventure what Nicholas Ray's Johnny Guitar is to the Western. Both bend their genres to the extremes of operatic grandeur with such force as to pull up just below the level of High Camp."[17] However Seymour states in the end that the film is overly melodramatic and ludicrous to absorb.[17]

Besides starring in the film, Jay Chou has also recorded two songs to accompany the film, one titled "Chrysanthemum Terrace" (Chinese: 菊花台; pinyin: Júhuā tái), released on his 2006 album Still Fantasy and one included in his Curse of the Golden Flower EP. The EP includes Jay Chou's song "Golden Armor" (Chinese: 黄金甲; pinyin: Huang2jin1 jia3).

