Spooks
Spooks is a BAFTA award-winning British television drama series produced by the independent production company Kudos for BBC One. The title is a popular colloquialism for spies, as the series follows the work of a group of MI5 intelligence officers based at the service's Thames House headquarters, in a highly secure suite of offices known as The Grid. In the United States and France, the show is broadcast under the title MI-5. In Canada, the programme originally aired as MI5 but now airs on BBC Canada as Spooks.
The programme was created by writer David Wolstencroft and has attracted popular guest actors including Hugh Laurie, Tim McInnerny, Ian McDiarmid, Jimi Mistry, Andy Serkis, Andrew Tiernan, Anton Lesser, Alexander Siddig and Anthony Head.


Starring Matthew Macfadyen, Keeley Hawes, David Oyelowo, Jenny Agutter, and Peter Firth, the initial series of six one-hour episodes premiered in the spring of 2002.
The series was a critical and popular success, averaging 7.5 million viewers over its six episodes,[1] due to its combination of glossy high production values with fast-paced action/adventure and spy intrigue storylines.[2]
The show quickly gained an unexpected edge with the violent killing of character Helen Flynn (Lisa Faulkner) in the second episode which drew the most number of complaints to the Broadcasting Standards Commission in 2002.[3] During an undercover operation Helen and Tom were captured by race riot instigator Robert Osborne, played by Kevin McNally, who tortured Helen with a deep fryer in an attempt to make her superior Tom reveal classified information. He refused and she was killed. This provoked an angry reaction from many viewers who jammed BBC phone switchboards with complaints, despite the show airing after the 9 pm watershed. Nevertheless the death of Faulkner's character set the precedent that in Spooks anyone can die at any time.

With the success of the first series, a second, longer series of ten episodes was commissioned and subsequently aired in 2003. This series saw the introduction of new main character Ruth Evershed in the second episode. It again drew praise, particularly for the fifth episode and the dramatic cliffhanger ending of the series finale.[4] The series averaged 7.1 million viewers.[5]

A third series of again ten episodes was transmitted on BBC One in the autumn of 2004 and concluding 13 December. The first episode saw the introduction of Rupert Penry-Jones as Adam Carter, drafted in from MI6 to help investigate Tom's disappearance. He later took over Tom's position as Senior Case Officer as over the course of the series all three of the original leading trio (MacFadyen, Hawes, Oyelowo) left the programme, their departures staggered over the second, sixth, and tenth episodes respectively.[6]
In episode six, Zoe is taken to court for misconduct during an operation and forced to leave MI5 and assume a new identity in Chile. She is replaced by Adam's wife Fiona (Olga Sosnovska).
The season garnered varied critical reactions, audience figures also dropping to a series average of 5.8 million viewers.[7] Despite this the BBC commissioned a fourth series.

The fourth series of Spooks began transmission on Monday 12 September 2005 on BBC One at 9 pm with the first of a two part story. The next day (13 September) the second episode was shown. The following week Spooks assumed a 9 pm Thursday slot, a break from the Monday 9 pm slot the previous series had traditionally occupied. Once again the series ran for 10 episodes and averaged 6.05 million viewers, a notable increase on the previous series.[8]
The opening two parter provided the series with two new regulars in Zafar Younis (Raza Jaffrey, whose character had debuted in the final episode of series three) and Juliet Shaw (Anna Chancellor). However it was also a controversial storyline as it featured terrorists (albeit anti-humanity and technology extremists rather than al Qaeda) bombing central London, something that in reality had taken place two months earlier on 7 July after the episodes had already been shot.
According to The Guardian newspaper the day the first episode aired, "The similarities were sufficient to cause head of drama Jane Tranter and new BBC One controller Peter Fincham to agonise over whether to drop the episodes."[9] The episodes eventually aired unedited, although before both installments of the two-parter the BBC One continuity announcer warned viewers that they featured scenes of terrorist bombing in London which some viewers might find disturbing.
Episode seven saw the departure of Fiona Carter, as actress Olga Sosnovska was pregnant during filming and elected to leave the programme. In a by-now traditional shocking exit Carter attempted to kill her deranged ex-husband, who she thought had been hanged several years previously. Her ex-husband, however, abducted her and later shot her dead in Adam's presence when she tried to escape (by cutting her own wrists with broken glass to fake a suicide attempt, and thus managing to overpower her guards temporarily). Her character was replaced in the Spooks set-up by Miranda Raison as Jo Portman, a new arrival at MI5 who had been recruited by Adam in the previous episode.
Episode nine also introduced the idea of extraordinary rendition to British television. The episode, entitled The Sting, once again displayed the programme's ability to deal with delicate subjects and hinted at the levels of subterfuge in international politics.

Spooks returned for its fifth (10 part) series on 17 September 2006 with the first part of a two-part story, which saw elements in the British Government, MI6 and the UK press conspire in an attempt to over-throw the Parliament and the Prime Minister. These elements had agreed that for Britain to survive the threats posed by modern day terrorism, democracy had to be replaced with rule by committee in the 21st Century. Tactics used included the assassination of members of MI5, notably Colin, an attempt to kill the Home Secretary and kidnap the Prime Minister's son. The second part followed the next day (18 September), marking Spooks' return to BBC One's Monday night schedule.[10]
Its storylines included a fake home-grown Al-Qaeda cell planning an attack on London (they are actually a Mossad team); the British government selling nuclear technology to Saudi Arabia; and the US administration selling arms to African dictators.
The series featured a more stable cast, more 2-part stories allowing for more complex plots and more dramatic use of split-screen. The ratings also remained consistent with those of the previous series, averaging 6 million viewers.[11]

The sixth series was commissioned by Jane Tranter, Head of Drama Commissioning at the BBC, by the time series 5 was announced. The series returned on 16 October 2007 at 9 pm on BBC One, and concluded on 18 December.[12][13] The series averaged 5.68 million viewers (the lowest to date.)[14] The sixth series was markedly different from the previous 5. For the first time, end credits were broadcast and there was less frequent use of the soundtrack composed by Jennie Muskett. The sixth series also attempted to weave a common strand across all ten episodes - the efforts of the MI5 and the British Government to strike a peace deal with the Iranian Government, having been tricked into bombing a chemical weapons train in Tehran by American intelligence. While the US prepared a pre-emptive war against Iran, MI5 attempted to maintain the peace and cover up the evidence of the UK train attack from both the public and Iran. Complicating these matters was Adam Carter's affair with the UK Iranian Ambassador's wife. During the course of the series, the serial arc was moved into and out of individual episodes.
The series ended on a cliff-hanger. Jo and Adam, captured by a terrorist group offering spies to the highest bidder, faced torture and eventual death, the group also being responsible for the torture and death of Zaf who disappeared after the Tehran bombing. Jo asked Adam to kill her rather than let her face a similar end. The final scene was of CO19 Specialist Firearms Command mounting a rescue by breaking into the house in which they are held captive, just as a limp Jo is shown in the arms of a devastated Adam.
A new website, Spooks Interactive, was published to coincide with the launch.[15] In April 2008, the Spooks production team won the BAFTA Award for Interactivity for their work on Spooks Interactive.[16][not in citation given]

Series 7 of Spooks began airing on 27 October 2008 for an eight episode run.[17] Peter Firth returned as Harry Pearce, along with Alex Lanipekun as Ben Kaplan, Hugh Simon as Malcolm Wynn-Jones and Gemma Jones as Connie James.
The first episode saw central character Adam Carter (portrayed by Rupert Penry Jones) die in a car explosion. It also saw the return of Ros Myers (played by Hermione Norris) and Jo Portman (Miranda Raison) as both of their fates were uncertain at the end of series 6. Richard Armitage joined the cast as Lucas North, an agent who has been held in a Russian prison for the past eight years. Following Adam's death, Ros was made the section leader and Lucas replaced her as a Senior Case officer.
In an interview on BBC Radio Five Live, Peter Firth intimated that Harry and Ruth might well be reunited, though this proved to be a red herring with regard to Series 7. He also stated that he was unaware of any potential plans for an eighth series, "like all TV, it depends on ratings...we'll have a good idea after (tonight's episode)". Spooks attracted an average audience of 5.9 million, with roughly 825,000 viewers watching the 10:30 pm showing of Episode Two on BBC Three. The second episode when shown the following day on BBC One drew in 5.6 million (a 22% audience share). The third episode when shown on BBC One on 3 November had an average audience of 5.6 million, once more claiming a 22% audience share. On November 10th, Spooks drew 5.2 million viewers, with a 21% audience share, down from the previous week. On 17 November, it drew an average audience of 4.9 million receiving a 20% share, however, it was broadcast against I'm A Celebrity Get Me Out Of Here! in the same time slot. The following week, Episode Six averaged an impressive 5.4 million, with a 22% share. Interestingly, the penultimate episode of the series which was broadcast on BBC Three at 10:30 pm managed to bring in 1 million viewers, being one of the most watched multi-channel shows of the night, easily beating Sky1's return of 24 which managed just under 400,000 viewers.[citation needed]
The series 8 recommission press release stated there would be a twist in the final episode of series 7.[citation needed] In this episode, a nuclear bomb is set to explode, triggered by a Russian sleeper agent who was part of Operation Tiresias. As Parliament and the Royal Family are evacuated, the nuclear threat to London is eliminated when Ros and Lucas are able to turn Connie James and elude an FSB kill squad. Connie was killed defusing the bomb by its conventional explosives. Seconds before the bomb exploded, Connie revealed that it had not been Harry who sold Lucas North out to the Russians as Lucas had always believed but rather herself. The episode concluded with Harry, conscious but with his mouth taped shut, in the boot of a car being zipped up in a body bag by Viktor Sarkisian, head of the FSB's London station.

In December 2008, just before the end of series 7, it was announced that series 8 is due to start filming in March 2009, and air in late 2009.[18] The press release also confirms that both Hermione Norris (Ros) and Richard Armitage (Lucas) will return for the new series.[18]

The main recurring characters, listed in order of fictional seniority (and alphabetically therein), include:







To date the show consists of 64 episodes. Spooks seventh series has now finished: its final episode first aired on 8 December 2008.
Each episode begins with a "previously" sequence, recapping recent events. Following a teaser, setting up the episode's narrative, a title sequence runs, featuring the main characters but no actor credits, and ends with the name of the series. Each episode ends with the final scene freezing and changing to a black-and-white negative image that then compresses with a distinctive sound effect into a flat white line against a black screen. With the exception of the finale, a trailer for the next episode is shown, followed by the Kudos and BBC logos. The series airs with no credits on BBC One, to maintain an atmosphere of the anonymity of real-life spies and the drama of each episode.
The second episode forward is aired on BBC Three, one week ahead of its BBC One showing (the first and last episode are only shown on BBC One). BBC Three airings include a brief credit sequence following the trailer and before the Kudos and BBC logos. Full credits are also available online.

