Nazi occultism
Speculation about National Socialism and Occultism has become part of popular culture since 1960. Aside from several popular documentaries, there are numerous books on the topic, most notably Le Matin des Magiciens (1960) and The Spear of Destiny (1972); The first examples of this literary genre appeared in the occult milieu in France and England in the early 1940s. These books have been discussed by the historian Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke as "the modern Mythology of Nazi occultism" or "the Nazi Mysteries": The recurring element of this "occult historiography" is the thesis that the Nazis were directed by occult agencies of some sort: black forces, invisible hierarchies, unknown superiors, secret societies or even Satan, who is supposed to have possessed Hitler. Since such an agency "has remained concealed to previous historians of National Socialism,"[1] Goodrick-Clarke and the German historian Michael Rißmann have described the genre [2] as cryptohistory. However, there also has been academic research on the potential influence of occultists and paganists on Nazism. This is part of an ongoing debate among historians and political scientist about the religious aspects of Nazism.

More than 50 years after the end of the Third Reich, National Socialism and Adolf Hitler have become a recurring subject in history documentaries. Among these documentaries, there are several that focus especially on the potential relations between Nazism and Occultism, such as the History Channel's documentary Hitler and the Occult.[3][4] As evidence of Hitler's "occult power" this documentary offers, for example, the infamous statement by Joachim von Ribbentrop of his continued subservience to Hitler at the Nuremberg Trials.[5] After the author Dusty Sklar has pointed out that Hitler's suicide happened at the night of April 30/May 1, which is Walpurgis Night, the narrator continues: "With Hitler gone, it was as if a spell had been broken". A much more plausible reason for Hitler's suicide (that does not involve the paranormal) is that the Russians had already closed in on Hitler's bunker to about several hundred meters and he did not want to be captured alive.
From the perspective of academic history, these documentaries on Nazism, if ever commented, are seen as problematic because they don't contribute to an actual understanding of the problems that arise in the study of Nazism and Neo-Nazism. Without referring to a specific documentary Mattias Gardell, a historian who studies contemporary separatist groups, writes:
Hitler and the Occult includes a scene in which Hitler is seen as speaking at a huge mass meeting. While Hitler's speech is not translated, the narrator talks about the German occultist and stage magician Erik Jan Hanussen: "Occultists believe, Hanussen may also have imparted occult techniques of mind control and crowd domination on Hitler." (see below) When historians have noted the existence of such "myths" as those about Erik Jan Hanussen, they have displayed nothing but academic contempt for their originators.

At least one documentary, Hitler's search for the Holy Grail, includes footage from the 1939 German expedition to Tibet. The documentary describes it as "the most ambitious expedition" of the SS. This original video material was made accessible again by Marco Dolcetta in his series Il Nazismo Esoterico in 1994.[7] An interview that Dolcetta conducted with Schäfer does not support myths of Nazi occultism, neither does Reinhard Greve's 1995 article Tibetforschung im SS Ahnenerbe (Tibet research within the SS Ahnenerbe),[8] although the later does mention the occult thesis.[7] Hakl comments that Greve should have emphasized the unreliability of authors like Berger and Pauwels or Angbert more.[7] Ernst Schäfer's expedition report explicitly remarks on the "worthless goings-ons" by "a whole army of quacksalvers" concerning Asia and especially Tibet.[7]

"The Modern Mythology of Nazi Occultism" is the title of Appendix E of Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke's seminal work The Occult Roots of Nazism. On nine pages, the Oxford historian Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke here surveys the most influential books that have attempted to explain the rise of Nazism as the work of a "hidden power". That Goodrick-Clarke's book includes such an appendix is not without reason. The book's main subject is the racist-occult movement of Ariosophy, a major strand of Esotericism in Germany and Austria, and this movement's potential influences on Nazism. One specific difficulty of this topic lies in "a number of popular books [that] have represented the Nazi phenomenon as the product of arcane and demonic influence."[9] In a new preface for the 2004 edition of The occult Roots... Goodrick-Clarke comments that in 1985, when his book first appeared, "Nazi 'black magic' was regarded as a topic for sensational authors in pursuit of strong sales."[10]
Consequently, Goodrick-Clarke comments on the popular literature in the Appendix of The occult Roots.... He refers to the writers of this genre as "crypto-historians",[9] and as their possible motive he mentions a "post-war fascination with Nazism".[11] For Goodrick-Clarke it is clear that the claims made by this literature are "wholly spurious."[12]
In his 2002 work Black Sun, which was originally intended to trace the survival of "occult Nazi themes" in the postwar period,[13] Goodrick-Clarke considered it necessary to readdress the topic. He devotes one Chapter of the book to the Nazi mysteries,[14] as he terms the field of Nazi occultism there. Other reliable summaries of the development of the genre have been written by German historians. The German edition of The occult Roots... includes an essay Nationalsozialismus und Okkultismus (National Socialism and Occultism), which traces the origins of the speculation about Nazi occultism back to publications from the late 1930s, and which was subsequently translated by Goodrick-Clarke into English. The German historian Michael Rißmann has also included an longer "excursus" about Nationalsozialismus und Okkultismus in his acclaimed book on Adolf Hitler's religious beliefs.[15]
According to Goodricke-Clarke the speculation of Nazi occultism originated from "post-war fascination with Nazism";[16] The "horrid fascination" of Nazism upon the Western mind[17] emerges from the "uncanny interlude in modern history" that it presents to an observer a few decades later.[16] The idolization of Hitler in Nazi Germany, its short lived and brutal dominion on the European continent and Nazism's irrational and gruesome Antisemitism set it apart from other periods of modern history.[17] "Outside a purely secular frame of reference, Nazism was felt to be the embodiment of evil in a modern twentieth-century regime, a monstrous pagan relapse in the Christian community of Europe."[17]
By the early 1960s, "one could now clearly detect a mystique of Nazism."[17] A sensationalistic and fanciful presentation of its figures and symbols, shorn of all political and historical contexts" gained ground with thrillers, non-fiction books and films and permeated "the milieu of popular culture."[17]
Some of this modern mythology even touches Goodrick-Clarke's topic directly. The rumor that Adolf Hitler had encountered Lanz von Liebenfels already at the age of 8, at Heilgenkreuz abbey, goes back to Les mystiques du soleil (1971) by Michel-Jean Angbert. "This episode is wholly imaginary."[18]
Nevertheless, Michel-Jean Angbert and the other authors discussed by Goodrick-Clarke present their accounts as real, so that this modern mythology has led to several legends that resemble conspiracy theories, concerning, for example, the Vril Society or rumours about Karl Haushofer's connection to the occult. The most influential books were Trevor Ravenscroft's The Spear of Destiny and Le Matin des Magiciens by Pauwels and Bergier.
In Ravenscroft's book a specific interest of Hitler concerning the Spear of Destiny is alleged. With the annexation of Austria in 1938, the Hofburg Spear, a relic stored in Vienna, had actually come into the possession of the Third Reich and Hitler subsequently had it moved to Nuremberg in Germany. It was returned to Austria after the war.


For a demonic influence on Hitler, Hermann Rauschning's Hitler Speaks is brought forward as source,[19] although most modern scholars do not consider Rauschning reliable.[20] (As Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke summarises, "recent scholarship has almost certainly proved that Rauschning's conversations were mostly invented".)[21] Similarly to Rauschning, August Kubizek, one of Hitler's closest friends since childhood, claims that Hitler—17 years old at the time—once spoke to him of "returning Germany to its former glory"; of this comment August said, "It was as if another being spoke out of his body, and moved him as much as it did me."[22]
That Hitler (and also Stalin) were possessed by the devil is also believed by some members of the Catholic Church. Father Gabriele Amorth, an exorcist of the Vatican who has also spoken out against Harry Potter books, is "convinced that the Nazis were all possessed. All you have to do is think about what Hitler - and Stalin did. Almost certainly they were possessed by the Devil."[23] There even are documents that Pope Pius XII performed an exorcism on Hitler at a distance, but supposedly failed every time.[23]

Conspiracy theory "cults frequently identify German National Socialism inter alia as a precursor of the New World Order."[24] With regard to Hitler's later ambition of imposing a National Socialist regime throughout Europe, Nazi propaganda used the term Neuordnung (often poorly translated as "new order", while actually referring to "re-structurization" of state borders on the European map and the resulting post-war economic hegemony of Greater Germany),[25] so one could probably say that the Nazis pursued "a" new world order. But the claim that Hitler and the Thule Society conspired to create "the" New World Order (as put forward on some webpages)[26] is completely unfounded; the Thule Society did not have this impact on Nazism and Hitler never attended any of their meetings.[27]

Various conspiracy theory websites also claim that the infamous occultist Aleister Crowley sought to contact Hitler during World War II as well.[28][29] Despite several allegations and speculations to the contrary (e.g. Giorgio Galli) there is no evidence of an encounter between Crowley and Hitler.[30] In 1991, John Symonds, one of Crowley's literary executors published a book: The Medusa's Head or Conversions between Aleister Crowley and Adolf Hitler, which has "definitely" to be understood as a literary fiction.[30] That the edition of this book was limited to 350 also contributed to the mystery surrounding the topic.[30] Mention of a contact between Crowley and Hitler — without any sources or evidence — is also being made in a letter from René Guénon to Julius Evola dated October 29, 1949, which later reached a broader audience.[30]

When Hitler and the Occult describes how Hitler "seemed endowed with even greater authority and charisma" after he had resumed public speaking in March 1927, the documentary states that "this may have been due to the influence" of Erik Jan Hanussen. It is said that "Hanussen helped Hitler perfect a series of exaggerated poses," useful for speaking before a huge audience. The documentary then interviews Dusty Sklar about the contact between Hitler and Hanussen, and the narrator makes the statement about "occult techniques of mind control and crowd domination".
Whether Hitler had met Hanussen at all is not certain. That he even encountered him before March 1927 is not confirmed by other sources about Hanussen. In the late 1920s to early 1930s Hanussen made political predictions in his own newspaper, Hanussens Bunte Wochenschau, that gradually started to favour Hitler, but until late 1932 these predictions varied.[31] In 1929 Hanussen predicted, for example, that Wilhelm II would return to Germany in 1930 and that the problem of unemployment would be solved in 1931.[31]

Goodrick-Clarke examines several pseudo-historic "books written about Nazi occultism between 1960 and 1975", that "were typically sensational and under-researched".[32] He terms this genre "crypto-history", as its defining element and "final point of explanatory reference is an agent which has remained concealed to previous historians of National Socialism".[33] Characteristic tendencies of this literature include: (1) "a complete ignorance of primary sources" and (2) the repetition of "inaccuracies and wild claims", without the attempt being made to confirm even "wholly spurious 'facts'".[34] Books debunked in Appendix E of The Occult Roots of Nazism are:
These books are only mentioned in the Appendix. Otherwise the whole book by Goodrick-Clarke does without any reference to this kind of literature; it uses other sources. This literature is not reliable; however, books published after the emergence of The Occult Roots of Nazism continue to repeat claims that have been proven false:



(Different editions have different episodes)[44][45][46][47]

The image of a connection between Nazism and the occult is a common theme in 
