Y: The Last Man
Y: The Last Man is a comic book series by Brian K. Vaughan and Pia Guerra, about the only man to survive the mysterious simultaneous death of every male mammal on Earth. The series was published in sixty issues by Vertigo, and collected in a series of 10 paperback volumes. The series' covers were primarily by J. G. Jones and Massimo Carnevale.

In the series, on July 17, 2002, something (referred to as a plague) simultaneously kills every mammal possessing a Y chromosome - including embryos, fertilized eggs, and even sperm. The only exceptions appear to be Yorick Brown, a young amateur escape artist, and his Capuchin monkey Ampersand. This premise is somewhat similar to the mid-1980s DC graphic Novel Me and Joe Priest, except that in the prior story, rather than all men but one being killed, all men but the main character were rendered infertile.
Society is plunged into chaos as infrastructures collapse and the surviving women everywhere try to cope with the loss of the men, their survivors' guilt, and the knowledge that humanity is doomed to extinction. Vaughan meticulously crafts the new society that emerges out of this chaos, from the conversion of the Washington Monument into a monument to the dead men, to the genesis of the fanatical ultra-feminist Daughters of the Amazon, who believe that Mother Earth cleansed itself of the "aberration" of the Y chromosome, to male impersonators becoming valued romantically and professionally.
Over the course of their journey, Yorick and his friends discover how society has coped in the aftermath of the plague. However, many of the women they encounter have ulterior motives in regard to Yorick. Though the subject matter of the series is entirely serious, Y: The Last Man is also noted for its humor. Yorick in particular is a source of one-liners, although the other characters have their moments as well.


The storylines, broken down by trade paperback collections.

The source of the plague that wiped out every living mammal with a Y chromosome except Yorick Brown and Ampersand is never concretely explained. A number of possible explanations were given throughout the course of the book but none are definitive answers. Discussing the cause of the plague, Vaughan is quoted as saying,
"I feel that there is a definitive explanation, but I like that people don't necessarily know what it is. In interviews we always said that we would tell people exactly what caused the plague. The thing was, we never said when we were going to tell. We weren't going to tell you when we were telling you, I should say. We might have told you in issue #3. There might have been something in the background that only a couple people caught. It might have been Dr. Mann's father's very detailed, scientific explanation. It might have been Alter's off-the-wall conspiracy theory. The real answer is somewhere in those 60 issues, but I prefer to let the reader decide which one they like rather than pushing it on them."[20]
Possible explanations include:

The film rights to the series have been acquired by New Line Cinema, and as of July 24, 2007 screenwriter Carl Ellsworth and director D. J. Caruso, the team behind Disturbia, are attached to the project with David S. Goyer as a producer.[21]
Caruso intends on finishing the script in the summer and filming during the fall of 2008. The script will be a rewrite of the original draft written by Vaughan himself.[22]
Caruso claims that the source material was too much to be told in one movie and they decided to concentrate on the best first movie they can, which would end somewhere around issue 14 of the comic series. The entire comic series as a whole would be plotted into three movies.[23] Rumors have been circulating that actor Shia LaBeouf will play the role of Yorick.[24] Caruso and LaBeouf have worked together in both the films Disturbia and Eagle Eye. Caruso plans to use a real monkey, and not a CGI construct, to play Ampersand.[22]
Many are suggesting that Zachary Levi (of the NBC show Chuck) should play Yorick. An easter egg in a recent episode of Chuck showed a Y the Last Man poster in Chuck's room, along with his sister's fiance reading the comic, which may confirm Zachary's involvement in the project.

The series is being collected in trade paperbacks.
After the finale, the series was re-released, in parts, as oversized hardcovers with alternate cover art.

Y: The Last Man, Volume 10: Whys and Wherefores was nominated for the first Hugo Award for Best Graphic Story.


