Never Gonna Give You Up
"Never Gonna Give You Up" is a song originally performed by singer Rick Astley. It was released as a single from Astley's multi-million selling debut album, Whenever You Need Somebody (1987), which was written and produced by Stock Aitken Waterman. The song was a worldwide number-one hit, initially in the singer's native United Kingdom in 1987, where it stayed at number one for five weeks and was the best-selling single of that year.
The song won Best British Single at the 1988 Brit Awards.
It became number one throughout Europe and hit number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States on March 12, 1988. It reached number one in Australia in December 1987. Soon after, the song was specifically mentioned in The Manual by hit-makers The KLF as a positive example of 'genius' chart pop lyrics. "Never Gonna Give You Up" is listed as the best charting single of the 1980s in Australia by the Kent Music Report due to its longevity in the charts. The music video for the song has become the basis for the "Rickrolling" Internet meme.

In the "Never Gonna Give You Up" music video, directed by Simon West,[1] a smiling Astley sings and dances to the song in various outfits and venues in West London, sometimes accompanied by backup dancers. A bartender played by Clive Clarke gradually shifts from casually noticing Astley's singing to being fully engrossed in the song with energetic acrobatic moves. The athletic exertion of many of the other dancers also becomes more intense over the course of Astley's performance.

"Never Gonna Give You Up" is the subject of a popular Internet prank known as "rickrolling" involving misleading links redirecting to the song's music video. By May 2007, the practice had achieved notoriety on the Internet,[2] and it increased in popularity after its use as a 2008 April Fool's Day joke by various media companies and websites, including YouTube rickrolling all of its featured videos on that day and a website allowing people to Rickroll their friends' phones.[3]
In 'a couple of weeks', about 13 million people had been 'rickrolled' into watching Astley's video, the BBC reported on 1 April 2008. "I think it's just one of those odd things where something gets picked up and people run with it," Astley told the Los Angeles Times in late March 2008, adding: "That's what's brilliant about the Internet."[4][5]
Rick Astley also appeared in the 2008 Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade interrupting a song performed by those on a float promoting the Cartoon Network program Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends with a lipsynched performance of "Never Gonna Give You Up". [6]

In 1997, the French band 2Be3 covered the song under the name "Toujours là pour toi", which had a great success in France (#4) and Belgium (Wallonia) (#12).[7] Eurobeat artist Kevin Johnson also covered the song for the album Super Eurobeat 149.[8] In 1999, an Italian cover titled "Non ti lascerò" was made by Fiorello.[9]
In 2008, it has been covered by Ashley Tisdale for the Degree Girl: OMG Jams!.
In April 2008, a house music remix of the track was produced by a group of London dance producers working under the pseudonym "The Rickrollerz" on the day of, and in honor of, the London Liverpool Street Station "Rickmob" on 11 April. UK Producer Simple Sigh also produced a remix in April 2008, entitled "Never Gonna Give You Up (Simple Sigh's RickRoll Remix)".
In 2008, a dance remix was produced by DJ Solly. [10]
In 2008, Rick Astley won the MTV EMA awards for "Best Act Ever" with the song "Never Gonna Give You Up", as a result of collective voting from thousands of Astley enthusiasts.
On November 25, 2008, Barry Manilow released a version of the song on his The Greatest Songs of the Eighties album.[11]
The song was also covered in the Family Guy episode "Meet the Quagmires", by the character Brian (voiced by Seth MacFarlane), at a country club dance.
On the Rocks, a collegiate a cappella group at the University of Oregon, covered the song for their 2008 album The Green Room. It was selected for the Best of Collegiate A Cappella 2009 compilation CD, and labeled as "Coldplay Medley" in an attempt to Rickroll listeners.





