Vasopressin

More reference expression data
Arginine vasopressin (AVP), also known as vasopressin, argipressin or antidiuretic hormone (ADH), is a hormone found in most mammals, including humans.[1] Vasopressin is a peptide hormone. It is derived from a preprohormone precursor that is synthesized in the hypothalamus and stored in vesicles at the posterior pituitary. Most of it is stored in the posterior pituitary to be released into the blood stream; however, some of it is also released directly into the brain.


One of the most important roles of AVP is to regulate the body's retention of water; it is released when the body is dehydrated and causes the kidneys to conserve water, thus concentrating the urine, and reducing urine volume. In high concentrations, it also raises blood pressure by inducing moderate vasoconstriction. In addition, it has a variety of neurological effects on the brain, having been found, for example, to influence pair-bonding in voles.
A very similar substance, lysine vasopressin (LVP) or lypressin, has the same function in pigs and is often used in human therapy.

AVP has three effects by which it contributes to increased urine osmolarity (increased concentration), and decreased urine excretion. These are:
1) It increases the permeability to water of the distal convoluted tubules and collecting tubules in the nephrons of kidneys and thus allows water reabsorption and excretion of a smaller volume of concentrated urine - antidiuresis. This occurs through insertion of additional water channels (Aquaporin-2s) into the apical membrane of the tubules/collecting duct epithelial cells. The aquaporins allow water to pass out of the nephron (at the distal convoluted tubules and the conducting tubules) and into the cells, increasing the amount of water re-absorbed from the filtrate.
V2 receptors, G protein-coupled receptors coupled to Gs, on the basolateral membrane of the cells lining the distal convoluted tubules and conducting tubules (in the nephron) have an active site for AVP. The G protein, which is in contact with the V2 receptor inside the cell, move to adenylyl cyclase, triggering adenylyl cyclase to convert ATP into cAMP, plus 2 inorganic phosphates. The cAMP cascade then triggers the insertion of Aquaporin-2 water pores by exocytosis of storage vesicles.
The repressor protein that regulates the gene for protein kinase A (PKA) has a binding site for cAMP, causing the repressor protein to change its shape and leave the operator region of the gene. This allows for transcription of the gene for PKA. PKA then signals ATP to dephosphorylate, providing energy for vesicles (which contain aquaporin channel proteins in their membranes) to fuse with the apical membrane of the cell. Calcium ions may also be required in this process, therefore it may be possible that, PLC (phospholipase C- beta) has an associated role. It should be noted that PLC can be activated by a G-protein coupled receptor.
2) AVP's second effect on the kidney is to increase the permeability of the papillary portion of the collecting duct to urea, allowing increased reabsorption of urea into the medullary interstitium, down the concentration gradient created from the removal of water in the cortical collecting duct.
3) The third effect that AVP has on the kidney is that it stimulates sodium reabsorption in the thick-ascending loop of Henle by increasing the activity of the Na+-K+-2Cl--cotransporter.

Vasopressin increases peripheral vascular resistance and thus increases arterial blood pressure. This effect appears small in healthy individuals; however it becomes an important compensatory mechanism for restoring blood pressure in hypovolemic shock such as occurs during hemorrhage.

Vasopressin released within the brain has many actions:
In recent years there has been particular interest in the role of vasopressin in social behavior. It is thought that vasopressin, released into the brain during sexual activity, initiates and sustains patterns of activity that support the pair-bond between the sexual partners; in particular, vasopressin seems to induce the male to become aggressive towards other males.[citation needed]
Evidence for this comes from experimental studies in several species, which indicate that the precise distribution of vasopressin and vasopressin receptors in the brain is associated with species-typical patterns of social behavior. In particular, there are consistent differences between monogamous species and promiscuous species in the distribution of vasopressin receptors, and sometimes in the distribution of vasopressin-containing axons, even when closely-related species are compared.[citation needed] Moreover, studies involving either injecting vasopressin agonists into the brain, or blocking the actions of vasopressin, support the hypothesis that vasopressin is involved in aggression towards other males. There is also evidence that differences in the vasopressin receptor gene between individual members of a species might be predictive of differences in social behavior.[citation needed]

Vasopressin is secreted from the posterior pituitary gland in response to reductions in plasma volume, in response to increases in the plasma osmolality, and in response to Cholecystokinin by the small intestine:
The neurons that make vasopressin, in the hypothalamic supraoptic nuclei (SON) and paraventricular nuclei (PVN), are themselves osmoreceptors, but they also receive synaptic input from other osmoreceptors located in regions adjacent to the anterior wall of the third ventricle. These regions include the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis and the subfornical organ.
Many factors influence the secretion of vasopressin:

The main stimulus for secretion of vasopressin is increased osmolality of plasma. Reduced volume of extracellular fluid also has this effect, but is a less sensitive mechanism.
The vasopressin that is measured in peripheral blood is almost all derived from secretion from the posterior pituitary gland (except in cases of vasopressin-secreting tumours). However there are two other sources of vasopressin with important local effects:

Below is a table summarizing some of the actions of AVP at its three receptors, differently expressed in different tissues and exerting different actions:

The vasopressins are peptides consisting of nine amino acids (nonapeptides). (NB: the value in the table above of 164 amino acids is that obtained before the hormone is activated by cleavage). The amino acid sequence of arginine vasopressin is Cys-Tyr-Phe-Gln-Asn-Cys-Pro-Arg-Gly, with the cysteine residues forming a sulfur bridge. Lysine vasopressin has a lysine in place of the arginine.
The structure of oxytocin is very similar to that of the vasopressins: it is also a nonapeptide with a sulfur bridge and its amino acid sequence differs at only two positions (see table below). The two genes are located on the same chromosome separated by a relatively small distance of less than 15,000 bases in various species. The magnocellular neurons that make vasopressin are adjacent to magnocellular neurons that make oxytocin, and are similar in many respects. The similarity of the two peptides can cause some cross-reactions: oxytocin has a slight antidiuretic function, and high levels of vasopressin can cause uterine contractions.
Here is a table showing the superfamily of vasopressin and oxytocin neuropeptides:

Decreased vasopressin release or decreased renal sensitivity to vasopressin leads to diabetes insipidus, a condition featuring hypernatremia (increased blood sodium concentration), polyuria (excess urine p
