Creative nonfiction
News†‚Ä¢ Writing†‚Ä¢ Ethics†‚Ä¢ Objectivity†‚Ä¢ Values†‚Ä¢ Attribution†‚Ä¢ Defamation†‚Ä¢ Editorial independence†‚Ä¢ Education†‚Ä¢ Other topics
Advocacy†‚Ä¢ Citizen†‚Ä¢ Civic†‚Ä¢ Collaborative†‚Ä¢ Community†‚Ä¢ Conspiracy†‚Ä¢ Gonzo†‚Ä¢ Investigative†‚Ä¢ Literary†‚Ä¢ Muckraker†‚Ä¢ New†‚Ä¢ Narrative†‚Ä¢ Peace†‚Ä¢ Visual†‚Ä¢ Watchdog
Fourth Estate†‚Ä¢ Fifth Estate†‚Ä¢ Freedom of the press†‚Ä¢ Infotainment†‚Ä¢ Media bias†‚Ä¢ Public relations†‚Ä¢ Yellow journalism
Newspapers†‚Ä¢ Magazines†‚Ä¢ News agencies†‚Ä¢ Broadcast†‚Ä¢ Online†‚Ä¢ Photojournalism†‚Ä¢ Alternative media
†This box: view†‚Ä¢†talk†‚Ä¢†edit†
Creative nonfiction (also known as literary or narrative nonfiction) is a genre of writing truth which uses literary styles and techniques to create factually accurate narratives. Creative nonfiction contrasts with other nonfiction, such as technical writing or journalism, which is also rooted in accurate fact, but is not primarily written in service to its craft. As a genre, creative nonfiction is still relatively young, and is only beginning to be scrutinized with the same critical analysis given to fiction and poetry.

For a text to be considered creative nonfiction, it must be factually accurate, and written with attention to literary style and technique. ‚ÄúUltimately, the primary goal of the creative nonfiction writer is to communicate information, just like a reporter, but to shape it in a way that reads like fiction.‚Äù [1] Forms within this genre include personal essays, memoir, travel writing, food writing, biography, literary journalism, and other hybridized essays. Critic Chris Anderson claims that the genre can be understood best by splitting it into two subcategories--the personal essay and the journalistic essay--but the genre is currently defined by its lack of established conventions. [2]
Literary critic Barbara Lounsberry in her book The Art of Fact suggests four constitutive characteristics of the genre, the first of which is ‚ÄúDocumentable subject matter chosen from the real world as opposed to ‚Äòinvented‚Äô from the writer‚Äôs mind.‚Äù [3] By this, she means that the topics and events discussed in the text verifiably exist in the natural world. The second characteristic is ‚ÄúExhaustive research,‚Äù [3] which she claims allows writers ‚Äúnovel perspectives on their subjects‚Äù and ‚Äúalso permits them to establish the credibility of their narratives through verifiable references in their texts.‚Äù [4] The third characteristic that Lounsberry claims is crucial in defining the genre is ‚ÄúThe scene‚Äù. She stresses the importance of describing and revivifying the context of events in contrast to the typical journalistic style of objective reportage. [5] The fourth and final feature she suggests is ‚ÄúFine writing: a literary prose style‚Äù. ‚ÄúVerifiable subject matter and exhaustive research guarantee the nonfiction side of literary nonfiction; the narrative form and structure disclose the writer‚Äôs artistry; and finally, its polished language reveals that the goal all along has been literature.‚Äù [6]
Creative nonfiction may be structured like traditional fiction narratives, as is true of Fenton Johnson's story of love and loss, "Geography of the Heart," and Virginia Holman's "Rescuing Patty Hearst." When book-length works of creative nonfiction follow a story-like arc, they are sometimes called narrative nonfiction. Creative nonfiction often escapes traditional boundaries of narrative altogether, as happens in the bittersweet banter of Natalia Ginzburg's essay, "He and I," and in John McPhee's hypnotic tour of Atlantic City, "In Search of Marvin Gardens."

In recent years, several well-publicized incidents within the United States have called into question the truthfulness and factual standards of creative nonfiction. Given its different styles and characteristics, it is not held to the same journalistic ethics and standards as direct reporting or news publications. Its allowances of artistic license to authors are not standardized, and some have accused writers of glorification of interpretation, and even of fabrication. A recent example of these incidents is the James Frey controversy in regards to his memoir A Million Little Pieces, published in 2003. In his memoir, Frey claimed to have had certain experiences, which were revealed in 2006 to be fabrications.[7]

To date, there is very little published literary criticism of nonfiction works, despite the fact that the genre is often published in respected publications such as The New Yorker, Vanity Fair, and others. A handful of the most widely recognized writers in the genre such as Gay Talese, Tom Wolfe, John McPhee, Joan Didion and Norman Mailer, have seen some criticism on their more prominent works. ‚ÄúCritics to date, however, have tended to focus on only one or two of each writer‚Äôs works, to illustrate particular critical points.‚Äù [8] These analyses of a few key pieces are hardly in-depth or as comprehensive as the criticism and analyses of their fictional contemporaries. As the popularity of the genre continues to expand, many nonfiction authors and a handful of literary critics are calling for more extensive literary analysis of the genre.
‚ÄúIf, these four features delimit an important art form of our time, a discourse grounded in fact but artful in execution that might be called literary nonfiction, what is needed is serious critical attention of all kinds to this work: formal criticism (both Russian Formalism and New Criticism), historical, biographical, cultural, structuralist and deconstructionist, reader-response criticism and feminist (criticism).‚Äù [8]
‚ÄúNonfiction is no longer the bastard child, the second class citizen; literature is no longer reified, mystified, unavailable. This is the contribution that poststructuralist theory has to make to an understanding of literary nonfiction, since poststructuralist theorists are primarily concerned with how we make meaning and secure authority for claims in meaning of language.‚Äù [9]


Chronological order of publication (oldest first)


