OGame
OGame is a text-based, resource-management and space-war themed massively multiplayer online browser game with over two million accounts.[2] OGame was created in 2000 and is produced and maintained by Gameforge AG.[3][4][dead link]. OGame is available in multiple different languages, while different nationalities have their own communities. The game does not differ between the nationality communities except in rare cases. Players are generally informed of news and other things such as changes in rules or new versions through the official forums [5].
As of February 11, 2009, OGame.org has a total of 43 universes and one Beta testing universe that is testing the new redesign. More are being added periodically. OGame also hosts the "pr0game" universe, with different rules, currently listed on OGame.org as Universe 35.

All OGame universes consist of three classifications: galaxies, systems, and planet slots. All universes have 9 galaxies, each with 499 systems, which have 15 planet slots. Sending fleets between different galaxies takes the longest time, whereas sending a fleet within the same system takes the least time.
Each player starts with one planet at a randomly assigned coordinate between slots 4 and 12, in a random system and galaxy. The first planet always consists of 163 fields, which determine how many building upgrades can be built on the planet, regardless of the slot in the player's system. The player's empire can consist of up to 9 planets in any unoccupied planet slot. All construction, research, and missions are performed and launched from a planet or moon. Development is done through using three resources: metal, crystal, and deuterium, and also energy and dark matter. There are different ways to obtain these resources, including mining and trading. Players are ranked according to their points, one point is awarded for every one thousand resource units invested in a construction, research, or defence. No points are given for unspent resources.
Unlike many other real-time strategy games, OGame does not give the player constant control of his or her spacecraft. Instead, the player sends the ship(s) to a location (using the game's coordinate system) and what to do when the fleet arrives. In OGame, combat is resolved when fleets and/or defenses meet. The combat takes place instantly and consists of 1 to 6 rounds. Fleet attacks are usually aimed to obtain other player's resources, although fleet attacks can also be done to destroy an opponent's fleet and collect the debris field created from the battle. Defenses are built to defend a planet against an attacking enemy fleet.

An alliance is a group of players who have banded together and is mostly used for solidarity purposes. Alliances are created for players to protect each other from attacks, join together to raid other planets, or to promote free trade amongst members. Members of an alliance can use the ACS (Alliance Combat System), available in some universes, to synchronize fleet movements and missions with members of the same alliance and temporarily deploy a fleet on an ally's planet.

All purchased effects are paid with Dark Matter, which can be purchased from Gameforge with real currency. Dark Matter can also be obtained in much lower quantities, through in-game expedition missions.

The Commander provides improved functionality and user interface to the player. Features include a building queue which allows the player the ability to order the construction of up to 5 buildings at a time. The player also gets an “Empire View” that shows all details on every planet including ships, defenses, resources, and energy. Other benefits include message filters, shortcuts, an improved galaxy view and commands, and no advertisements. Commander was the original officer, giving no direct benefits to the game, only improved versions of currently existing processes.

On February 16, 2007, Officers were introduced to the game. The officer feature gives players a real advantage in the game, for a price, while those who cannot afford it, or do not have a method of paying for it, go without it. It is worth noting that GameForge had previously promised its users it would never introduce pay-to-play options that provided direct benefits, and the change thus caused a large scale of conflict in the community.
The 5 officers types are:

Players can hire a merchant using dark matter to trade one resource type for another. The amount of resources traded is limited to the amount of free space in one's storage buildings and the amount of dark matter the player has.

OGame is monitored by Game Operators, also known as GOs, Super Game Operators and Game Administrators each of whom have the rights to ban any player suspected of misconduct and violation of the rules. The rules can be different for each OGame universe.[6] Players who have been banned are put into the pillory [7] of their universe. The pillory shows the reason of banning and the administrator who made the decision. It also shows the unbanning of a player when they have clarified the fault. The planets of players that have received lifelong bans are subject to the one month account deletion due to inactivity. However, if the banned player has purchased Dark Matter, their accounts will not be deleted. Deleting these accounts would be, as claimed by GameForge staff, a violation of German law.

OGame won the bronze Superbrowsergame Award in 2006.[8]


