Vandana Shiva
Vandana Shiva (Hindi: वन्दना शिवा; b. November 5, 1952, Dehra Dun, Uttarakhand, India), is a physicist, environmental activist and author. Shiva, currently based in Delhi, is author of over 300 papers in leading scientific and technical journals.
Shiva participated in the nonviolent Chipko movement during the 1970s. The movement, whose main participants were women, adopted the tactic of hugging trees to prevent their felling. She is one of the leaders of the International Forum on Globalization, (along with Jerry Mander, Edward Goldsmith, Ralph Nader, Jeremy Rifkin, et al.), and a figure of the global solidarity movement known as the alter-globalization movement. She has argued for the wisdom of many traditional practices, as is evident from her interview in the book Vedic Ecology (by Ranchor Prime) that draws upon India's Vedic heritage.

Shiva was born in the valley of Dehradun, to a father who was the conservator of forests and a farmer mother with a love for nature. She was educated at St Mary's School in Nainital, and at the Convent of Jesus and Mary, Dehradun.[1] Shiva was trained as a gymnast and received her Ph.D. in physics at the University of Western Ontario in 1978. Her thesis was titled "Hidden Variables and Non-locality in Quantum Theory"[2] She later went on to interdisciplinary research in science, technology and environmental policy, at the Indian Institute of Science and the Indian Institute of Management in Bangalore.

Shiva has fought for changes in the practice and paradigms of agriculture and food. Intellectual property rights, biodiversity, biotechnology, bioethics, genetic engineering are among the fields where Shiva has contributed intellectually and through activist campaigns. She has assisted grassroots organizations of the Green movement in Africa, Asia, Latin America, Ireland, Switzerland and Austria with campaigns against genetic engineering. In 1982, she founded the Research Foundation for Science, Technology and Ecology, which led to the creation of Navdanya. Her book, "Staying Alive" helped redefine perceptions of third world women. Shiva has also served as an adviser to governments in India and abroad as well as non governmental organisations, including the International Forum on Globalisation, the Women's Environment & Development Organization and the Third World Network.
Vandana Shiva participated in the Stock Exchange of Visions project in 2007.

Shiva is interviewed in the international documentary *One Water (documentary), directed by Sanjeev Chatterjee and Ali Habashi. (http://www.onewaterthemovie.org/). "One Water," an award-winning documentary about the world’s changing relationship to water, was filmed in 15 countries and produced at the University of Miami as a collaboration among the School of Communication, College of Engineering and the Frost School of Music.
Shiva stars in the feature documentary Blue Gold: World Water Wars by Sam Bozzo.
Shiva is featured in Irena Salina's documentary Flow: For Love of Water that was in competition at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival.
Shiva is featured in the documentary Dirt! The Movie that was in competition at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival.
She is featured in the documentary "The Corporation" protesting against large corporations as a seed activist, and she is also featured in the documentary "Fed up!:Genetic Engineering, Industrial Agriculture and Sustainable Alternatives."
Recently, she has been featured in the documentary "The world according to Monsanto", a film made by a French independent journalist Marie-Monique Robin.
Shiva is also featured in the feature documentary film about the Dalai Lama, entitled Dalai Lama Renaissance.[1]

In 1993, Shiva received the Right Livelihood Award (also known as the Alternative Nobel Prize) "...For placing women and ecology at the heart of modern development discourse."[2]. Other awards she has received include the Global 500 Award of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in 1993 [3], and the Earth Day International Award of the United Nations (UN) for her dedicated commitment to the preservation of the planet as demonstrated by her actions, leadership and by setting an example for the rest of the world.
Additional awards include:

Vandana Shiva plays a major role in the global Ecofeminist movement. According to her article Empowering Women, Shiva suggests that a more sustainable and productive approach to agriculture can be achieved through reinstating a system of farming in India that is more centered around engaging women. She advocates against the prevalent "patriarchal logic of exclusion," claiming that a woman-focused system would change the current system in an extremely positive manner.[3]
"Agriculture systems, which are women centered and earth centered, are also more productive. 300 units of inputs produce 100 units of output in industrial agriculture, while ecological systems in which women participate use only 5 units of input to produce 100 units of output."[4]
In this way, Indian and global food security, can only benefit from a focus on empowering women through integrating them into the agricultural system. [5]





