Shinkansen
The Shinkansen (Êñ∞ÂππÁ∑ö ?) is a network of high-speed railway lines in Japan operated by four Japan Railways Group companies. Starting with the 210†km/h (130†mph) T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen in 1964, the now 2,459†km (1,528†mi) long network has expanded to link most major cities on the islands of Honsh≈´ and Ky≈´sh≈´ at speeds up to 300†km/h (186†mph). Test runs have reached 443†km/h (275†mph) for conventional rail in 1996, and up to a world-record 581†km/h (361†mph) for maglev trainsets in 2003.
Shinkansen literally means "New Trunk Line", referring to the tracks, but the name is widely used inside and outside Japan to refer to the trains as well as the system as a whole. The name "Superexpress" (Ë∂ÖÁâπÊÄ• ,ch≈ç-tokky≈´?), initially used for Hikari trains, was retired in 1972 but is still used in English-language announcements and signage.
In contrast to older lines, Shinkansen are standard gauge, and use tunnels and viaducts to go through and over obstacles rather than around them. With a minimum curve radius of 4,000†meters (2,500†meters in the oldest T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen), the system was built entirely from the ground up on elevated tracks without road crossings and separate from conventional rail. It employs an ATC (Automatic Train Control) system, eliminating the need for signals.
The T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen is the world's busiest high-speed rail line. Carrying 375,000 passengers a day, it has transported more passengers (4.5†billion) than all other high speed lines in the world combined.[citation needed] Though largely a long-distance transport system, the Shinkansen also serves commuters who travel to work in metropolitan areas from outlying cities.

Japan was the first country to build dedicated railway lines for high speed travel. Because of the mountainous terrain, the existing network consisted of 3†ft 6†in (1,067†mm) narrow gauge lines, which generally took indirect routes and could not be adapted to higher speeds. Consequently, Japan had a greater need for new high speed lines than countries where the existing standard gauge or broad gauge rail system had more upgrade potential.

The popular English name bullet train is a literal translation of the Japanese term dangan ressha (Âºæ‰∏∏ÂàóËªä), a nickname given to the project while it was initially being discussed in the 1930s. The name stuck due to the Shinkansen locomotive's resemblance to a bullet and its high speed.
The "Shinkansen" name was first formally used in 1940 for a proposed standard gauge passenger and freight line between Tokyo and Shimonoseki that would have used steam and electric locomotives with a top speed of 200†km/h (120†mph). Over the next three years, the Ministry of Railways drew up more ambitious plans to extend the line to Beijing (through a tunnel to Korea) and even Singapore, and build connections to the Trans-Siberian Railway and other trunk lines in Asia. These plans were abandoned in 1943 as Japan's position in World War II worsened. However, some construction did commence on the line; several tunnels on the present-day Shinkansen date to the war-era project.

Following the end of World War II, high speed rail was forgotten for several years while passengers steadily increased on the conventional T≈çkaid≈ç Main Line. By the mid-1950s the T≈çkaid≈ç Line was operating at full capacity, and the Ministry of Railways decided to revisit the Shinkansen project. In 1957, Odakyu Electric Railway introduced its Romancecar 3000 SE service, setting a world speed record of 145†km/h (90†mph) for a narrow gauge train. This train gave designers the confidence that they could safely build an even faster standard gauge train. Thus the first Shinkansen, the 0 Series, was built on the success of the Romancecar.
Government approval came in December 1958, and construction of the first segment of the T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen between Tokyo and Osaka started in April 1959. Some of the construction was financed by an US$80†million loan from the World Bank. A test facility for rolling stock, now part of the line, opened in Odawara in 1962.
The T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen opened on October 1, 1964, in time for the Tokyo Olympics. Conventional Limited Express service took six hours and 40 minutes from Tokyo to Osaka, but the Shinkansen made the trip in just four hours, shortened to three hours and ten minutes by 1965. The service was an immediate success, reaching the 100†million passenger mark in less than three years on 13 July 1967, and one billion passengers in 1976. Sixteen-car trains were introduced for Expo '70 in Osaka. With an average of 23,000 passengers per hour per direction in 1992, the T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen is the world's busiest high-speed rail line.[1]
The first Shinkansen trains, the 0 series, ran at speeds of up to 210†km/h (130†mph)[1], later increased to 220†km/h (137†mph). The last of these trains, with their classic bullet-nosed appearance, were retired on 30 November 2008. A driving car from one of the 0 series trains is now in the British National Railway Museum in York, England.

The T≈çkaid≈ç Line's rapid success prompted an extension westward to Hiroshima and Fukuoka (the Sany≈ç Shinkansen), which was completed in 1975.
Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka was an ardent supporter of the Shinkansen, and his government proposed an extensive network paralleling most existing trunk lines. Two new lines, the T≈çhoku Shinkansen and J≈çetsu Shinkansen, were built following this plan. Many other planned lines were delayed or scrapped entirely as Japan National Railways slid into debt throughout the late '70s, largely due to the high cost of building the Shinkansen network. By the early 1980s, the company was practically insolvent, leading to its privatization in 1987.
Development of the Shinkansen continued despite this setback, however. Several new train models followed the first, each generally with its own distinctive appearance. Shinkansen trains now run regularly at speeds up to 300†km/h (186†mph), placing them alongside the French TGV, Italian TAV, Spanish AVE, and German ICE among the fastest trains in the world.
Since 1970, development has also been underway for the Ch≈´≈ç Shinkansen, a planned maglev line from Tokyo to Osaka. On December 2, 2003, the 3-car maglev trainset JR-Maglev MLX01 reached a world speed record of 581†km/h (361†mph).
In 2003, JR Central reported that the Shinkansen's average arrival time was within six seconds of the scheduled time. This includes all natural and human accidents and errors and is calculated over roughly 160,000 Shinkansen trips completed. The previous record, from 1997, was 18 seconds. Japan celebrated 40†years of high speed rail in 2004, with the T≈çkaid≈ç Shinkansen line alone having carried 4.16†billion passengers. According to Japanrail.com, the website for companies that operate Shinkansen, the network has carried over 6†billion passengers.

During the Shinkansen's 44-year, nearly 7†billion-passenger history, there have been no passenger fatalities due to derailments or collisions, despite frequent earthquakes and typhoons. Injuries and a single fatality have been caused by doors closing on passengers or their belongings; attendants are employed at platforms to prevent such mishaps. There have, however, been suicides by passengers jumping both from and in front of moving trains. In comparison, there have been TGV accidents and InterCityExpress accidents resulting in fatalities, despite these systems' comparatively placid operating environments.
The only derailment of a Shinkansen train in passenger service occurred during the Ch≈´etsu Earthquake on October 23, 2004. Eight of ten cars of the Toki No. 325 train on the J≈çetsu Shinkansen derailed near Nagaoka Station in Nagaoka, Niigata. There were no casualties among the 154 passengers. [2]PDF†(43.8†KiB) In the event of an earthquake, an earthquake detection system can bring the train to a stop very quickly. Experimental Fastech 360 trains have ear-like air resistance braking flaps to assist emergency stops at high speeds. A new anti-derailment device was installed after detailed analysis of the derailment.

The Shinkansen has had a great effect on Japan's business, economy, society, environment and culture.[1] The time savings alone from switching from a conventional to a high-speed network have been estimated at 400 million hours, an economic impact of ¬• 500 billion per year.[1] Shinkansen connectivity has regenerated rural towns such as Kakegawa that would otherwise be too distant from major cities.[1] Travelling Tokyo-Osaka by Shinkansen produces only around 16% of the carbon dioxide of the equivalent journey by car, a savings of 15,000 tons of CO2 per year.[1]
However, the vast construction costs of the Shinkansen network, particularly the later, less profitable lines often driven more by political interference than actual demand, imposed vast debt servicing costs on JNR that, by 1971, made JNR unprofitable even before depreciation.[2] JNR's Shinkansen-fueled debt eventually ballooned to ¬•28 trillion and was an instrumental factor in the company's eventual privatization and breakup.[2] The privatized JRs eventually paid a total of only ¬•9.2 trillion to acquire JNR's Shinkansen network.[1]

Noise pollution concerns mean that increasing speed is becoming more difficult. Current research is primarily aimed at reducing operational noise, particularly the "tunnel boom" phenomenon caused when trains exit tunnels at high speed.
JR East has announced that new trains capable of up to 320†km/h (199†mph) are to be introduced coinciding with the opening of the T≈çhoku Shinkansen extension from Hachinohe to Shin-Aomori in early 2011. Extensive trials using the Fastech 360 test trains has shown that operation at 360†km/h (224†mph) is not currently feasible due to problems of noise pollution, overhead wire wear, and braking distances. This may indicate the limits to railed Shinkansen technology, and eventually maglev or another technology will need to replace it. Operation at speeds of up to 320†km/h between Utsunomiya and Shin-Aomori is expected to allow journey times of around 3†hours for trains from Tokyo to Shin-Aomori (a distance of approximately 675†km (419†mi).
The Ky≈´sh≈´ Shinkansen from Kagoshima to Yatsushiro opened in March 2004. Three more extensions are planned for opening by 2010: Hakata-Yatsushiro, Hachinohe-Aomori, and by 2014: Nagano-Kanazawa, and 2015: Aomori-Hakodate (through the Seikan Tunnel). There are also long-term plans to extend the network, Hokkaid≈ç Shinkansen from Hakodate to Sapporo, Ky≈´sh≈´ Shinkansen to Nagasaki, as well as to complete a link from Kanazawa back to Osaka, although none of these are likely to be completed by 2020. Also, the CEO of JR Central announced plans to have the maglev Ch≈´≈ç Shinkansen operating Tokyo‚ÄîNagoya in 1 hr (366†km/227†mi) by 2025.
The Narita Shinkansen project to connect Tokyo to Narita International Airport, initiated in the 1970s but halted in 1983 after landowner protests, has been officially cancelled and removed from the Basic Plan governing Shinkansen construction. Parts of its planned right-of-way will be utilized by the Narita Rapid Railway link when it opens in 2010. Although the NRR will use standard-gauge track, it will not be built to Shinkansen specifications and it would not be feasible to convert it into a full Shinkansen line.

The main Shinkansen lines are:
Two further lines, known as "Mini-shinkansen", have also been constructed by upgrading existing sections of line:
There are two standard-gauge lines not technically classified as Shinkansen lines but with Shinkansen services:

Many Shinkansen lines were proposed during the boom of the early 1970s but have yet to be constructed. These are called Seibi Shinkansen (Êï¥ÂÇôÊñ∞ÂππÁ∑ö) or "planned Shinkansen". One of these lines, the Narita Shinkansen to Narita Airport, has been officially cancelled, but a few remain under development.
The following lines were also proposed in the 1973 plan, but have subsequently been shelved indefinitely.
