Silbo Gomero language
Silbo Gomero ("El Silbo" or "Gomeran Whistle") is a whistled language spoken by inhabitants of La Gomera in the Canary Islands to communicate across the deep ravines and narrow valleys (barrancos) that radiate through the island [1]. A speaker of Silbo Gomero is sometimes referred to as a "Silbador".
Little is known of the original language or languages of the Canaries, though it is assumed they must have had a simple enough phonological/phonetic system to allow an efficient whistled language[2]. Invented by the original inhabitants of the island, the Guanches, and "spoken" also on el Hierro, Tenerife, and Gran Canaria, Silbo was adapted to Castilian Spanish by the last Guanches and adopted by the Castilian settlers in the 16th century and thus survived. In 1976 Silbo barely remained on el Hierro, where it had flourished at the end of the nineteenth century[3]. When this unique medium of communication was about to die out in the late 20th century, the local government required all Gomeran children to study it in school. The language's survival before that point was due to topography or terrain and the ease with which it is learned by native speakers[4].
As with other whistled forms of non-tonal languages, the Silbo works by retaining approximately the articulation of ordinary speech, so "the timbre variations of speech appear in the guise of pitch variations" (Busnel and Classe: v). The language is a whistled form of a dialect of Spanish [5].
Ramón Trujillo of the University of La Laguna published his book "EL SILBO GOMERO análisis lingüístico" in 1978. This work containing almost a hundred spectrograms concludes in a theory that there are only two vowels and four consonants in the Silbo Gomero language[6][7]. The vowels can be either high or low, and the consonants are either rises or dips in the “melody line” which can be broken or continuous. The Ph.D work of Julien Meyer (2005 - in French only) gives a statistical analysis of the vowels of Silbo showing that there are 4 vowels statistically distinguished in production and that they are also perceived so (pg 100) [8]. Trujillo's 2005 collaboration with Gomeran whistler Isidro Ortiz and others ("EL SILBO GOMERO Materiales didácticos" - Spanish only) also correctly recognizes the presence of 4 vowels (pg 63) [9], and describes in detail the areas of divergence between his empirical data and Classe’s phonetic hypotheses. Also in 2005, Annie Rialland of the University of Paris III: Sorbonne Nouvelle published an acoustic and phonological analysis of Silbo based on new materials, showing that not only gliding tones but also intensity modulation plays a role in distiguishing different whistled sounds.[10]
Manuel Carreiras of the University of La Laguna and David Corina of the University of Washington published research on Silbo in 2004 and 2005 arguing that Silbo was understood by the brain in much the same way as a spoken language[11]. Their study of speakers of Spanish (some of whom "spoke" Silbo and some of whom did not) showed (by monitoring brain activity with functional magnetic resonance imaging) that while non-speakers of Silbo merely processed Silbo as whistling, speakers of Silbo processed the whistling sounds in the same linguistic centers of the brain that processed Spanish sentences.
busuu.com, the online community for learning languages, is now offering the possibility to learn the nearly extinct language. The website is offering Learning material about Silboon its website. Additionally, the Madrid based start-up has produced a video available to see on YouTube to increase the popularity of the language.



Sapir–Whorf hypothesis

