Comparison of Windows and Linux
Comparison of the Microsoft Windows and Linux computer operating systems is a common topic of discussion among their users. Windows is the most prominent proprietary operating system, while Linux is the most prominent operating system that is free software (note that many Linux distributions also have a small amount of proprietary components, such as compiled binary blob drivers provided by hardware manufacturers, for their default installation.[1]) The two operating systems compete for user-base in the personal computer market as well as the server market, and are used in government offices, schools, business offices, homes, intranet and internet servers, supercomputers, and embedded systems.
Windows dominates in the desktop and personal computer markets with about 90% of the desktop market share, and accounted for about 66% of all servers sold (not used) in the year 2007.[2] In server revenue market share (2007Q4) Windows achieved 36.3% and Linux achieved 12.7%.[3] As of November 2007, Linux powered 85% of the world's most powerful supercomputers, compared to Windows' 1.4%.[4] In February 2008, Linux powered five of the ten most reliable internet hosting companies, compared to Windows' two.[5]
Linux and Windows differ in philosophy, cost, ease of use, versatility, and stability, with each seeking to improve in their perceived weak areas. Comparisons of the two tend to reflect the origins, historic user base and distribution model of each. Typically, some major areas of perceived weaknesses regularly cited have included the poor “out-of-box” usability of the Linux desktop for the mass-market and susceptibility to malware for Windows. Both are areas of rapid development in both fields.[citation needed]
Proponents of free software argue that the key strength of Linux is that it respects what they consider to be the users' essential freedoms: the freedom to run it, to study and change it, and to redistribute copies with or without changes.

In 2004, Microsoft launched a marketing campaign, "Get the Facts", to encourage users to switch from Linux to Windows Server System.[6] Microsoft claims that its products have an overall lower total cost of ownership (TCO) than open source programs because of their ease of use, resulting in less work and lower staff wages.[7]
Microsoft's figures are disputed by a variety of organizations, notably Novell (which produces a linux distribution) and The Register.[8] Some websites suggest that some common inaccuracies in Microsoft's figures stem from including figures for the Unix and Solaris operating systems with figures for Linux.[9]
In 2004, The UK Advertising Standards Authority warned Microsoft that an advertisement using research that claimed “Linux was […] 10 times more expensive than Windows Server 2003”, was “misleading”, as the hardware chosen for the Linux server was needlessly expensive.[10]
The German foreign ministry said that the cost of open source desktop maintenance is by far the lowest it experienced.[11]

The market share of Linux or Windows is difficult to determine as the former is usually not required to register their copies; additionally, a large number of illegal copies of Windows exist. The above desktop usage share data is estimated from web browser user agent strings, rather than sales information or surveys. This is not entirely reliable because, among other things, web browsers do not always provide accurate information to web servers, and different sites attract different audiences that may be more prone to using one OS or another: such bias is very difficult to eliminate. (However, most servers are unlikely to be included in this measurement due to their traditional role as dedicated computer machines). More estimates are available at Usage share of desktop operating systems.

The Windows Shell. This uses as its window manager the Desktop Window Manager on Windows Vista, and a Stacking window manager built on top of GDI in older versions. The desktop environment may be modified by a variety of third party products such as WindowBlinds; or completely replaced, for example by Blackbox for Windows, or LiteStep. The graphics system is part of the Windows kernel, and even servers run graphic subsystems.
A number of desktop environments are available, of which GNOME and KDE are the most widely used. By default, they use as their window managers Metacity and KWin respectively, though these can be replaced by other window managers such as Compiz Fusion. Other desktop environments and window managers include Enlightenment, Xmonad, Xfce, Openbox, Fluxbox, etc. The X Window system runs in user-space and is optional.[16] Multiple X Window system instances can run at once, and it is a fully networked protocol. See Also: Comparison of X Window System desktop environments.
The Command Prompt exists to provide direct communication between the user and the operating system. A .NET-based command line environment called Windows PowerShell has been developed. It varies from Unix/Linux shells in that, rather than using byte streams, the PowerShell pipeline is an object pipeline; that is, the data passed between cmdlets are fully typed objects. When data is piped as objects, the elements they encapsulate retain their structure and types across cmdlets, without the need for any serialization or explicit parsing of the stream. Cygwin provides a bash terminal for Windows. Windows Script Host is included in Windows 98 and newer versions.
Linux is strongly integrated with the system console. The command line can be used to recover the system if the graphics subsystem fails.[17][18] A large number of Unix shells exists; with the majority being "Bourne shell compatible" shells, of which the most widely used is GNU Bash. Alternatives include the feature-full Z shell; as well as shells based on the syntax of other programming languages, such as the C shell, and Perl Shell. Many applications can be scripted through the system console,[19] there are a lot of small and specialized utilities meant to work together and to integrate with other programs. This is called the toolbox principle.

Some older versions require third party drivers (for example, by using driver floppies disks or slipstreaming the drivers and creating a new installation CD) if using a large number of SATA or SATA2 drives or RAID arrays.[21]
General purpose oriented distributions offer a live CD or GUI installer (SuSE, Debian, Pardus, Pclinuxos, Mandriva, Ubuntu, Fedora etc.), others offer a menu-driven installer (Vector Linux, Slackware, Debian) while others, targeting more specialized groups, require source to be copied and compiled (Gentoo). The system can also be built completely from scratch, directly from source code (Linux from Scratch).
"Installation time" can be measured differently depending on what actions are included: installing the base OS, additional drivers, OS updates, and/or applications.
Uninstallation is equally easy, but components and registry entries can be left behind if a program has been equipped with an older uninstaller. Windows has a built-in installer program, and software that is to be installed has an installer "wrapper" that interfaces with the Windows Installer to accomplish installation.
Windows programs are compiled against generalized, specification-based header files and are not tied to the local machine where they are compiled. That fact combined with a well-documented effort by Microsoft to maintain binary compatibility has resulted in Windows programs typically being usable on a variety of Windows versions.
