Mac OS X v10.5
Mac OS X version 10.5 "Leopard" is the sixth major release of Mac OS X, Apple’s desktop and server operating system for Macintosh computers, and the successor to Mac OS X v10.4 "Tiger". Leopard was released on 26 October 2007, and is available in two variants: a desktop version suitable for personal computers, and a server version, Mac OS X Server. Apple offers a reduced-cost upgrade to people who purchased new Apple computers after 1 October 2007 that do not already have Mac OS X v10.5 pre-installed or a Leopard upgrade DVD included.[1] Steve Jobs stated at Macworld 2008 that over 20% of Macs use Leopard as their operating system.[2] Leopard will be superseded by Mac OS X v10.6 "Snow Leopard".
According to Apple, Leopard contains over 300 changes and enhancements,[3] covering core operating system components as well as included applications and developer tools. Leopard introduces a significantly revised desktop, with a redesigned Dock, Stacks, a semitransparent menu bar, and an updated Finder that incorporates the Cover Flow visual navigation interface first seen in iTunes. Other notable features include support for writing 64-bit graphical user interface applications, an automated backup utility called Time Machine, support for Spotlight searches across multiple machines, and the inclusion of Front Row and Photo Booth, which were previously included with only some Mac models.
Apple missed Mac OS X v10.5’s release time frame as originally announced by Apple’s CEO Steve Jobs. When first discussed in June 2005, Jobs had stated that Apple intended to release Leopard at the end of 2006 or early 2007.[4] A year later, this was amended to Spring 2007;[5] however on 12 April 2007, Apple issued a statement that its release would be delayed until October 2007 because of the development of the iPhone.[6]


Apple advertises that Mac OS X v10.5 Leopard has 300+ new features[7], including:


New security features intend to provide better internal resiliency to successful attacks, in addition to preventing attacks from being successful in the first place.

Apple states the following basic Leopard system requirements, although, for some specific applications and actions (such as iChat backdrops) an Intel processor is required:[41]
Leopard’s retail version was not released in separate versions for each type of processor, but instead consisted of one universal release that could run on both PowerPC and Intel processors.[26] Leopard drops support for slower G4 and all G3 processors.[41] Because all new Macs use Intel processors, the versions of Leopard shipped with them are Intel only.

Some ways of running Leopard on certain unsupported hardware, primarily slower PowerPC G4 computers, have been discovered. A common way is use of the program LeopardAssist, which is a bootloader similar in some respects to XPostFacto (used for installing earlier releases of Mac OS X on unsupported G3 and pre-G3 Macs) that uses the Mac’s Open Firmware to tell Leopard that the machine does have a CPU meeting the 867 MHz minimum requirement that the Installer checks for before installation is allowed to commence, when in reality the CPU is slower.[42] Currently, LeopardAssist only runs on slower G4s and many people have installed Leopard successfully on these older machines.
Users who have access to supported hardware have installed Leopard on the supported machine then simply moved the hard drive to the unsupported machine. Leopard is only compiled for AltiVec-enabled PowerPC processors (G4 and G5) though, as well as Intel, so both of these methods will only work on Macs with G4 or later CPUs. While some of the earlier beta releases were made to run on some later G3 machines (mostly later 800–1000 MHz iBooks), no success with the retail version has been reported on G3 Macs except for some later iMacs and "Pismo" PowerBook G3s with G4 processor upgrades installed. Until recently it appeared that the only G3 Macs on which Leopard could be run were those with an aftermarket G4 processor and an AGP graphics card, as failures with the OS partially booting before crashing were reported on older Macs such as the original tray-loading iMacs and the Beige and Blue & White Power Mac G3 (all with G4 upgrades as Leopard will not even begin to load without one) whereas it would boot fine on newer Macs where the Installer restriction had been circumvented. However, more recently it has been reported[43] [44] that with some more work and use of kernel extensions from XPostFacto, Tiger and beta builds of Leopard, the OS can be made to run on G4-upgraded Macs as old as the Beige G3. While the basic Leopard system can be used on most G4 or later Macs, some functionality such as Front Row or Time Machine fails to work without a Quartz Extreme-capable graphics card, which many of the earlier G4s did not include in their factory specification.
Also, users with non-Apple PC’s can install Leopard on their computers, through the OSx86 project. A variety of installation processes can be used, the most common being to use a modified Darwin bootloader designed to trick the retail, or vanilla, operating system into thinking that it is running on an EFI-based Mac. A hardware device capable of being attached to a PC’s motherboard has also been released, EFI-X, enabling much the same function as the modified Darwin bootloader.

The retail packaging for Leopard is significantly smaller than that of previous versions of Mac OS X (although later copies of Tiger also came in the new smaller box). It also sports a lenticular cover, making the X appear to float above a purple galaxy, somewhat resembling the default Leopard desktop wallpaper.[45]

