Gnome
A gnome is a mythical creature characterized by its extremely small size and subterranean lifestyle.[1] The word gnome is derived from the New Latin gnomus. It is often claimed to descend from the Greek γνώσις gnosis, "knowledge", but more likely comes from genomos "earth-dweller", in which case the omission of e is, as the OED calls it, a blunder. Another possibility is that it comes from the Arabic نوم (Noum),[citation needed] which means sleep. It is also possible that Paracelsus simply made the word up. Notable Gnomes in English Folklore include Sprin, Rumo, Pinny, Fislet and Gulcifer.
Paracelsus includes gnomes in his list of elementals, as earth elementals. He describes them as two spans high, and very taciturn.[2] Sometimes they are seen as a type of fairy, though at other times are seen as a distinct species in their own right.

Some confusion arises as the gnome is one of many similar but subtly different creatures in European folklore; mythical creatures such as goblins and dwarves are often represented as gnomes, and vice versa.
Gnomes feature in the legends of many of central, northern and eastern European lands by other names: a kaukis is a Prussian gnome, and barbegazi are gnome-like creatures with big feet in the traditions of France and Switzerland. Further east, tengu are sometimes referred to as winged gnomes.
According to certain medieval beliefs, Gnomes were deformed, usually with a hunchback, and were led by their king, Gob, who ruled with a magic sword.[3]
Today, Gnomes are traditionally thought of as being small, bearded and wearing pointed, colourful, conical hats. They live in natural areas close to the Earth and care for wildlife. They are more benevolent than other folkloric creatures such as goblins. This traditional view is supported in such fictional works as The Secret Book of Gnomes.

The first garden gnomes were made in Gräfenroda,[4] a town known for its ceramics in Thuringia, Germany in the mid-1800s. Philip Griebel made terracotta animals as decorations, and produced gnomes based on local myths as a way for people to enjoy the stories of the gnomes' willingness to help in the garden at night. The garden gnome quickly spread across Germany and into France and England, and wherever gardening was a serious hobby. Gnome manufacture spread across Germany with numerous other large and small manufacturers coming into and out of the business, each one having its own particular style of design. World War II was hard on the industry and most producers gave up then. Griebel's descendants still make them and are the last of the German producers, all others having moved production to Poland or China. Currently, there are an estimated 25 million garden gnomes in Germany.[4]
Traditional gnomes are made from a terracotta clay slurry poured into molds. The gnome is removed from the mold, allowed to dry, and then fired in a kiln until it is hard. Once cooled the gnome is painted to the level of detail desired and sent to stores to be sold to consumers. More modern gnomes are made from schwau resins and similar materials.[citation needed]
Garden gnomes were first introduced to the United Kingdom in 1847 by Sir Charles Isham, when he brought 21 terracotta figures back from a trip to Germany and placed them as ornaments in the gardens of his home, Lamport Hall in Northamptonshire. Only one of the original batch of gnomes survives: Lampy, as he is known, is on display at Lamport Hall, and is insured for one million pounds.[5]
Garden gnomes have become a popular accessory in many gardens. They are often the target of pranks, known collectively as gnoming: people have been known to return garden gnomes "to the wild", most notably France's "Front de Liberation des Nains de Jardins" and Italy's "MALAG" (Garden Gnome Liberation Front). Some kidnapped garden gnomes have been sent on trips around the world (the travelling gnome prank; this later became the basis for Travelocity's "Roaming Gnome"). In 2008, a 53-year-old French man in Brittany was arrested on suspicion of stealing upwards of 170 garden gnomes.[4]
The practice of stealing garden gnomes is also sometimes referred to as "Gnome Hunting".
Gnomes are often depicted as having beards and are typically males, and usually wear red hats and are known to smoke pipes. They are made in various poses and pursuing various pastimes, such as fishing or napping.[6]
Garden gnomes are often viewed as "kitsch" and in poor taste.[4] Gnomes have become controversial in serious gardening circles in the UK, and have been banned from the prestigious Chelsea Flower Show as the organisers claim that they detract from the garden designs. Gnome enthusiasts accuse the organisers of snobbery because they are popular in working class and suburban gardens.[7]
It has been suggested by some scholars that the garden gnome is a descendant of the Greco-Roman fertility god Priapus, whose statue was often found in ancient gardens. [8] Welsh rugby union centre Jamie Roberts has the largest collection of gnomes in South Wales.

Despite the fact that Gnomes are usually seen as a mythical creature with no real existence, there have been certain cases where people have claimed to have encountered real, living gnomes, that are not fictional.

One of the Cottingley fairies photographs taken in 1917 by two young girls depicts a gnome. When the duo confessed to faking the photographs in the 1980s, they continued to insist that the one that they had taken of the gnome was genuine.

The Gnome sightings in Argentina is a reported wave of sightings of Gnomes in General Güemes, Salta, Argentina that came to its climax in 2007. The craze was similar to that of the chupacabra, which had also happened in the Americas. Some reports claim that a survey showed that 90% of locals believed in the creature with over a hundred claiming to have actually seen one of the creatures, however contrasting reports claim that very few locals actually believe in it. [9]
Locals had reported seeing gnomes (or duendes) for several decades, however reports increased in 2007 after railway workers reported seeing one run around the tracks. They reported seeing a knee height humanoid creature wearing a pointy hood who ran sideways.
The story was reported by El Tribuno in Argentina, and then The Sun in the UK. It was then picked up by Fox News in the USA, before becoming something of an urban legend. Since then, many skeptics have declared the story to be false, claiming that the video used as the main evidence is faked and that reports of the beliefs were exaggerated.
Various video recordings claiming to depict the creatures were uploaded onto websites such as YouTube. The majority follow the same formula of a group of teenagers getting scared by a gnome, and running away screaming.[10][11]
In this video, lasting only 16 seconds, a group of teenage males are playing football outside when they are terrified by a gnome that appears to be only a few inches tall. [12]
Two males are playing football indoors, when they are terrified at a creature that runs along the floor. [13]
In March 2008, a 'creepy gnome' who wears a pointy hat, that locals claim stalks the streets of General Guemes, Salta, Argentina,[14][15] was caught on video by local teenagers on their mobile phone, led by Jose Alvarez, who commented on how he and some friends had encountered it one night.
The video quality is fairly blurred and dark. It goes from showing the teenagers chatting, to zooming in on something rustling about in some long grass several metres away. The creature then dashes across a field, running sideways, and this is filmed for a brief few seconds.
A second video, virtually identical to the first, but with certain distinct differences, was later released on the internet, confirming that two very similar, yet different, versions of the account were filmed, providing strong evidence that the video was faked. [17]
On October, 2008, South America’s ‘creepy gnome’ or ‘midget monster’ had again caused panic among locals. Experts examined the recorded footage, (by Juan Carlos Roldan, his brother Javier and 5 friends, by the water fountain in Clodomira, Santiago del Estero, Argentina, and running down Avenue San Martin). Photographic expert Aldegonda Alvarz, of Universidad Nacional de Santiago del Estero, stated: "This video footage seems credible. We could be looking at another ‘petiso orejudo’ - small being."[18][19]

Gnomes are often used in fantasy stories for their cunning roles, normally as an inventor. Other reasons that gnomes are used in many games and stories are because of their funny nature, appearance, and awkward behaviors, so Fantasy authors will sometimes employ gnomes, as elementals, in their fiction.[20]

Some video games feature gnomes. One example of this is Cadash, which features gnomes extensively, especially in the third level where they live underground in their own grove. A gnome known as "Jubim" must be consulted in order to progress further in the game.
Gnomes have also made popular by appearances made in many online games.
In modern fantasy games such as Dungeons & Dragons[21], EverQuest[22], and World of Warcraft[23], gnomes are often included as a playable race. They are commonly portrayed as large-headed humanoids about a meter in height, displaying characteristics such as a cheery temperament, a high degree of intelligence coupled with curiosity and poor judgment, and an unusual talent when it comes to either using magic or inventing and building technology, depending on the setting.
These attributes - not found in traditional stories about gnomes - largely originated with the playable gnomes in Dungeons and Dragons, as well as the tinker gnome variant in the Dragonlance setting. Both World of Warcraft, and RuneScape take a similar approach with gnomes as inventors.
In the Mana series, Gnome was an earth elemental.
In the browser-based RPG, DragonFable, Gnomes are inventors that use steam-powered technology. They reside in the magitechnical city of Popsprocket.

In the movie Le Fabuleux Destin d'Amelie Poulain (which literally translates as "The Fabulous Destiny of Amélie Poulain") or Amelie (as used for U.S. release), the main character steals her father's garden gnome and has a plane stewardess she is familiar with take the Gnome to numerous places around the world, including New York, U.S.A. and Moscow, Russia. This is an example of the "Travelling Gnome" prank.
Miramax Films is in production of a film called 'Gnomeo and Juliet' starring the voice talents of James McAvoy and Emily Blunt, set to be released in 2010.

The popular children's TV series David the Gnome features very small gnomes as a kind, nature-loving race working to undo humanity's damage.
A 2005 episode of King of the Hill, "Yard, She Blows!" revolves around an antique garden gnome.
Gordon the Garden Gnome was a recent children's TV program on Cbeebies.
The final episode of the cult British TV comedy series Citizen Smith involves a homeowner destroying his prize garden gnome collection by accidentally stepping on the fire button in an armoured tank.
In two shorts featured in episodes of the Warner Brothers animated series "Freakazoid", a small group of "real" gnomes cursed to spend the daylight hours as common lawn ornaments until they atone - via good deeds - for a centuries-old prank against a Norse wizard - already upset by their treatment of his Viking brother. The gnomes are mischievous and selfish, but not evil, although completely wrongheaded in their attempts to "save" humanity from the vicious likes of yard sprinklers.
In an episode of South Park, Tweek is tormented by Underpants Gnomes

The Panzer crews of the Tiger tank detachment of the 2nd SS-Panzer Division "Das Reich" adopted a gnome symbol on their tank turrets. This was adopted during the Kursk offensive.

Particularly noteworthy is the phonetically spelled Nome King of the Oz books. Although the Wicked Witch of the West is the most famous of Oz's villains (thanks to the popular 1939 film The Wizard of Oz), the Nome King is the closest the book series has to a main antagonist. He appears again and again to cause trouble for the Land of Oz.
David the Gnome, a popular 1980's animated television series, featured the adventures of a tree-dwelling gnome and his wife, based on the children's books The Gnomes and The Secret Book of Gnomes by Rien Poortvliet and Wil Huygen.
In the Harry Potter series, gnomes are considered garden pests and appear to be more akin to animals than intelligent beings. In the second book, Ron scoffs at the garden gnome statues that Muggles keep, saying that they're chubby "Father Christmases" holding fishing rods, and generally depicted as doing things that real gnomes would never do. A "text book" written by J.K. Rowling to resemble the books that Harry uses in school (Fantastic Beasts and Where To Find Them) states that they can be ridden of if swung around in circles until dizzy and then thrown over the garden wall. They could also be eaten by a Jarvey, which is a ferrett-like creature. Gnomes are said to only reach a foot in height and have a large head with bony feet.
In the legendarium of J.R.R. Tolkien's Middle-earth, "Gnome" is an alternative and infrequently used word for Noldo or "Deep Elf". It appears in early editions of The Hobbit and also in The Book of Lost Tales (written early in Tolkien's career but not published until the 1980's). Feeling the word to be misleading, Tolkien omitted it entirely from his most famous work The Lord of the Rings, though it is mentioned briefly in an early draft of the appendices.
Author Ambrose Bierce wrote in "The Devil's Dictionary" that gnomes became extinct in the year 1764. The Devil's Dictionary is a tongue in cheek book labeled as "A guidebook for cynics".

"Gnomus" is the first movement of Modest Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition." In the words of music critic Vladimir Stasov, it is "a sketch depicting a little gnome, clumsily running with crooked legs."
"The Gnome" is a song by British psychedelic rock band Pink Floyd. It was written by the band's first leader, Syd Barrett, and tells the tale of a gnome named Grimble Gromble. It appears on the band's debut album The Piper at the Gates of Dawn.
"The Laughing Gnome" is an upbeat novelty track released by David Bowie in 1967.
In 2007, St. Louis-based jam band The Earth Mafia composed and recorded a song called "Gnomes." It is loosely based on the "South Park" episode of the same name. It is currently available on the band's MySpace page.
Gnomes are featured in the cover photo of George Harrison's first solo album "All Things Must Pass".
Many songs by the French space rock band Gong mention gnomes.
The Floridian rock band Fringe claims to have a strong connection with gnomes.

Gnomes are a creature in the "I am Snowman" series by PJPhoto on youtube.


