Gout
Gout (metabolic arthritis) is a crystal deposition disease hallmarked by elevated levels of uric acid (hyperuricemia) in the bloodstream. In this condition, crystals of monosodium urate (MSU) or uric acid are deposited on the articular cartilage of joints, tendons and surrounding tissues. It is marked by transient painful attacks of acute arthritis initiated by crystallization of urates within and about the joints and eventually leads to chronic gouty arthritis and the deposition of masses of urates in joints and other sites, creating tophi. Gout results from a combination of prolonged elevation of uric acid and overall acidity in the bloodstream. In isolation, neither elevated uric acid nor acidity is sufficient to cause gout.[1]

Gout is characterized by excruciating, sudden, unexpected, burning pain, as well as swelling, redness, warmth, and stiffness in the affected joint. This occurs most commonly in men's toes but can appear in other parts of the body and affect women as well. Low-grade fever may also be present. The patient usually suffers from two sources of pain. The crystals inside the joint cause intense pain whenever the affected area is moved. The inflammation of the tissues around the joint also causes the skin to be swollen, tender and sore if it is even slightly touched. For example, a blanket or even the lightest sheet draped over the affected area can cause extreme pain.
Gout usually attacks the big toe (approximately 75 percent of first attacks); however, it also can affect other joints such as the ankle, heel, instep, knee, wrist, elbow, fingers, or spine. In some cases, the condition may appear in the joints of small toes that have become immobile due to impact injury earlier in life; the resulting poor blood circulation can lead to gout.
Patients with long-standing hyperuricemia (see below) can have uric acid crystal deposits called tophi (singular: tophus) in other tissues such as the helix of the ear. Elevated levels of uric acid in the urine can lead to uric-acid crystals precipitating in the kidneys or bladder, forming uric-acid kidney stones.

Gout occurs when crystals of uric acid, in the form of monosodium urate, precipitate on the articular cartilage of joints, on tendons, and in the surrounding tissues. Uric acid is a normal component of blood serum. Uric acid is more likely to form into crystals when there is hyperuricemia, although hyperuricemia is 10 times more common without clinical gout than with it.[2] Gout can also occur when serum uric acid is normal, and when it is abnormally low (hypouricemia). Paradoxically, acute attacks of gout can occur together with a sudden decrease in serum uric acid, such as due to use of drugs (uricosurics, xanthine oxidase inhibitors), or total parenteral nutrition.[3] However, correlation does not imply causation. The sudden decrease may be a consequence of abrupt formation of crystals (removing uric acid from the serum), rather than a cause.
Regardless of the serum concentration of uric acid, precipitation of uric acid is markedly enhanced when the blood pH is low (acidosis). A similar pH-sensitive effect occurs in urine,[4] contributing to uric acid nephrolithiasis.
Uric acid is a product of purine metabolism, and in humans is normally excreted in the urine. Purines are generated by the body via breakdown of cells in normal cellular turnover, and also are ingested as part of a normal diet. The kidneys are responsible for approximately two-thirds of uric acid excretion, with the gut responsible for the rest.

Gout may be primary (including idiopathic), or secondary to (a complication of) another condition.

About 10% of people with hyperuricemia develop gout.[5]
The high levels of uric acid in the blood are caused by protein rich foods. Alcohol intake often causes acute attacks of gout and hereditary factors may contribute to the elevation of uric acid, e.g. inborn errors of purine-pyrimidine metabolism. Typically, persons with gout are obese, predisposed to diabetes and hypertension, and at higher risk of heart disease. Gout is more common in affluent societies due to a diet rich in proteins, fat, and alcohol. It is not rare, however, to find gout among the poorer classes, who drink large quantities of alcohol, and whose food is insufficient in quantity and quality. This is known as "poor man's gout." [6][7]
When it follows as a consequence of other health conditions such as renal failure, it is often regardless of the person's lifestyle.[8] Some studies have established a statistical connection between gout and lead poisoning,[9] and a significant correlation between levels of lead in the body and urate excretion and gout.[10] It is known that lead sugar was used to sweeten wine, and that chronic lead poisoning is a cause of gout,[11][12] and condition is then known as saturnine gout, because of its association with lead (Saturnus was the alchemists' term for the metal lead).[13]
Diuretics (particularly thiazide diuretics) have traditionally been blamed for precipitating attacks of gout because they compete at the same transporter, but a Dutch case-control study from 2006 appears to cast doubt on this conclusion.[14]

Secondary gout is a complication of other medical conditions. Medical conditions that commonly result in gout include:
Gout also can develop as a co-morbidity of other diseases, including polycythaemia, intake of cytotoxics, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, renal disorders, and hemolytic anemia. Gout is an important complication in a minority of solid organ transplant.[15]
Because some approved treatments for these other conditions also reduce serum uric acid, individualized treatment of gout has the potential to improve outcome.[16]

Clinically, gout can be hard to distinguish from several other conditions, including chondrocalcinosis. Chondrocalcinosis is a very similar disease, caused by deposition of calcium pyrophosphate rather than uric acid.
A definitive diagnosis of gout requires aspiration of synovial fluid from the affected joint or tissue. The fluid is examined by light microscopy for crystals of monosodium urate intracellular within polymorphonuclear leukocytes.[citation needed] The urate crystal has a needle-like morphology and strong negative birefringence under polarised light. This test may be difficult to perform, and a trained observer does better in distinguishing this crystal from others. Many physicians do not perform this test, relying instead on a variety of less specific clinical signs and laboratory tests.[17]
The most informative clinical signs are the presence of classic podagra (sudden, unexplained swelling and pain of the big toe joint on just one foot) and the presence of tophi.[18] Gouty tophi, particularly when not located in a joint, can be mistaken for basal cell carcinoma[19] or other neoplasm.[20]
Hyperuricemia is a common feature of gout, so its presence supports a diagnosis of gout. However, gout can occur without hyperuricemia.[21] Hyperuricemia is defined as a plasma urate (uric acid) level greater than 420 Î¼mol/L (7.0 mg/dL) in males, or 380 Î¼mol/L in females. However, a high uric acid level does not necessarily mean a person will develop gout. Urate is within the normal range in up to two-thirds of cases.[22] If gout is suspected, the serum urate test should be repeated once the attack has subsided. Other blood tests commonly performed are full blood count, electrolytes, renal function, thyroid function tests and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). This helps to exclude other causes of arthritis, most notably septic arthritis, and to investigate any underlying cause for the hyperuricaemia.
Ultrasound imaging (US) can be helpful. US signs of gouty joints include a double-contour appearance of the cartilage and a snowstorm appearance of the synovial membrane.[23] US can also be used to guide aspiration.[23]

Treatment has three objectives: manage symptoms of acute attacks, prevent acute attacks, and reduce serum uric acid.[24]

The first line of treatment should be pain relief. Once the diagnosis has been confirmed, the drug options are of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), colchicine and oral glucocorticoids,[25] or intra-articular glucocorticoids administered via a joint injection.
NSAIDs such as diclofenac, etoricoxib, indomethacin, ketoprofen, naproxen or sulindac may be prescribed.[26] For those at risk of gastric irritation from NSAIDs, an additional proton pump inhibitor may be given.[27]
Colchicine remains a second line drug in the UK for those unable to tolerate NSAIDs,[27][28] but its side effect profile has resulted in its role being relegated, at least in the US, to after that of oral glucocorticoids.[29] It impairs the motility of granulocytes and can prevent the inflammatory phenomena that initiate an attack. Colchicine should be taken within the first 12 hours of the attack and usually relieves the pain within 48 hours, although side effects (gastrointestinal upset such as diarrhea and nausea) can complicate its use. NSAIDs are the preferred form of analgesia for patients with gout.
A randomized controlled trial found similar benefit from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (single injection of diclofenac and then oral indomethacin) as from the oral glucocorticoid prednisolone; however, less adverse drug reactions occurred in the glucocorticoid group.[30]
Another possibility is acetazolamide, one of the first diuretics discovered. This drug inhibits the action of carbonic anhydrase on the proximal convoluted tubules within the kidneys, which effectively inhibits reabsorption of bicarbonate, thus alkalinizing the urine. After two to three days of usage, the diuretic effects of this drug decline because of increased downstream reabsorption of ions and water by the renal tubules; however, the alkalinization of urine persists, and this basic urine attracts weak acids such as uric acid and cystine into the urine, thus increasing their urinary excretion.
Before medical help is available, some over-the-counter medications can provide temporary relief from pain and swelling. NSAIDs such as ibuprofen can reduce the pain and inflammation slightly, although aspirin should not be used as it can worsen the condition. This is because aspirin raises plasma uric acid levels even at low doses by inhibiting uric acid secretion in the renal tubules[citation needed]. Aspirin also reduces vasodilatation due to inhibition of prostaglandin PGE2 and PGI2 synthesis in the renal medulla and glomeruli respectively (see mechanism of action of aspirin). This may be a contra-indication for the use of aspirin for gout pain as well.
The anti-hemorrhoidal ointment Preparation H can reduce gout-induced skin swelling temporarily. Ice may be applied for 20 to 30 minutes several times a day, and a randomized controlled trial found that patients who used ice packs had better relief of pain without side effects.[31] Since gout is caused by crystals, it has been suggested[citation needed] that keeping very well hydrated and heating the affected joint in hot water (rather than cooling with ice) will promote the dissolution and clearance of the urate crystals. Adequate hydration is a standard recommendation. However, a small study found that only icing, not heating, was beneficial.[32] Keeping the affected area elevated above the level of the heart also may help.[citation needed] Professional medical care is needed for long-term management of gout.
Due to swelling around affected joints for prolonged periods, shedding of skin may occur. This is particularly evident when small toes are affected and may promote fungal infection in the web region if dampness occurs, and treatment is similar to that for common athlete's foot.
Some sufferers of gout report an aggravation of the condition in the knees and toes associated with long periods of immobility, such as when sitting at a computer desk for long hours. Sufferers who notice early swelling or early pain may appear to be able to arrest the aggravation when medical treatment is applied before the condition gets worse. Where this is the case, a medically prescribed anti-inflammatory oral treatment taken with food and bed rest may provide relief within 6 to 8 hours.

For extreme cases of gout, surgery may be necessary to remove large tophi and correct joint deformity.
Extensive tophi that invade bone are associated with arthritis due to bone erosion.[33]

Prevention of chronic gout has a different objective than management of acute episodes (flareups). In an acute attack the objective is to reduce pain and inflammation. The objective of prevention is to stop any future attacks and associated cumulative tissue damage. Prevention strategies include reducing the supply of purine, dissolving crystals of uric acid so the uric acid can return to the blood, and increasing the excretion of uric acid from the blood into the urine, without causing lithiasis there. Prevention tactics involve careful diagnosis of the factors contributing to the gout, followed by appropriate use of medication, diet, and over the counter remedies.

Prescription drugs used to treat gout belong to several functional classes. These include xanthine oxidase inhibitors, uricosurics, and urate oxidases.
Probenecid, a uricosuric drug, often is prescribed for gout in conjunction with colchicine
