List of James Bond gadgets
A popular element of the James Bond franchise is the exotic equipment and vehicles he is assigned on his missions, which often prove to be critically useful.
The original books and early adaptations had only relatively minimal pieces like the modified attache case in From Russia with Love. However, the gadgets took on a more spectacular profile in the film version of Goldfinger, and its tremendous success encouraged the following films to have Bond supplied with still more equipment. For instance, it became an expected scene in each film where Q would present and demonstrate Bond's assigned tools for the mission, and it was a near guarantee that each and every piece would be invaluable to Bond in the field. In this sense, Bond gadgets became a prime example of the literary technique of Chekhov's gun.
Fans eventually complained that the use of gadgets became excessive in the Roger Moore films, particularly in Moonraker, and subsequent productions struggled to find a balance in which gadgets could have a place without giving the impression that the character unduly depended on them or using stories that arbitrarily included situations that exactly fit the use of the gadgets assigned.
This article concerns the gadgets James Bond typically carried on his person, along with additional gadgets used by others. For his gadget vehicles, see List of James Bond vehicles.



Here is a list of items that come with the briefcase







After Bond resigns from MI6, we see him cleaning out his desk, and gadgets from past films are shown, including the air supply from Thunderball and Red Grant's garotte watch from From Russia with Love.


It should be noted that although Major Boothroyd/Q and Q Branch are not present in this film, this film remains the most gadget heavy in the series.
This movie is noteworthy in that the gadgets break their own stereotype several times.

Nearly all gadgets in this film belong to the main villain, Francisco Scaramanga.


Exploding Bolas (seen tested in the MI6 monastery) : Designed to entrap an object, such as a human, and explode when the bola balls hit each other.

