Battlestar Galactica (2004 TV series)
Battlestar Galactica is an Emmy and Peabody Award-winning serial drama television program created by Ronald D. Moore that first aired as a three-hour miniseries in December 2003 on the Sci Fi network and ran for four seasons thereafter, ending its run on March 20, 2009. The series featured Emmy Award-winning and Oscar-nominated Edward James Olmos and Oscar-nominated Mary McDonnell and garnered a wide range of critical acclaim, including Emmy nominations for its creative works, writing and directing.

Battlestar Galactica continued from the 2003 mini-series to chronicle the journey of the last surviving humans from the Twelve Colonies of Kobol after their nuclear annihilation by the Cylons. The survivors are led by President Laura Roslin and Commander William Adama in a ragtag fleet of ships with the Battlestar Galactica, an old but powerful warship, as its command ship. Pursued by Cylons intent on wiping out the remnants of the human race, the survivors travel across the galaxy looking for the fabled and long-lost thirteenth colony: Earth. Unlike most space-based series, Battlestar Galactica has no aliens (apart from the man-made Cylon robots) and intentionally avoids technobabble.[2][3] Instead, most of the stories deal with the apocalyptic fall-out of the destruction of the twelve colonies upon the survivors and the moral choices the survivors must make in dealing with the survival of the human race, as well as their war with the Cylons. Stories also deal with the concept of perpetuated cycles of hate and violence driving the human/Cylon conflict, and religious issues, with the implication of an active God whose angelic agents intervene on behalf of the main characters, most notably Gaius Baltar.
Over the course of the show's four seasons, the war between the colonists and the Cylons takes many twists and turns. Despite the animosity on both sides, the Cylons and humans slowly turn away from their hatred for each other. Part of this is due to a growing schism within the humanoid Cylons, led by the villainous Cylon Number One, Brother John Cavil. Cavil's obsession with hiding the true genesis of the humanoid Cylons (created by members of the Galactica Crew, who themselves are humanoid Cylons from "Earth" who had their memories erased by Cavil) leads to a Civil War between the Cylons and a portion of the robot race forming an alliance with the humans. Other plotlines involve the mysterious destiny of Kara "Starbuck" Thrace, who is the subject of a prophecy involving her as the "Harbinger of Death", who will "lead humanity to its end" as well as the redemption of Gaius Baltar, as he becomes a pariah within the fleet (after being forced to collaborate with the Cylons) but ultimately finds redemption through monotheism-based religion.
In the final episodes, Thrace (resurrected) leads the surviving humans/Cylons to a new planet which Adama names Earth and which is revealed to be the actual planet Earth of present-day humanity. It is already inhabited by humans who are genetically compatible with the humans from the Galactica. The Earth of legend is now revealed to have been a different planet entirely which is a nuked out, uninhabited wasteland due to that planet's war with its Cylon creations. It is now revealed that all of the events of the series have been occurring 150,000 years prior to the era of present-day humanity. The entire group of humans/Cylons decides to live on the new planet and to discard all technology, and to destroy all of their spaceships by flying them into the sun.
The series ends with a coda set on Earth in the present day, as two "angels", in the form of Caprica Six and Gaius Baltar, muse on whether or not the cycle of violence and war between humanity and machine will happen again or if it had finally been broken. it is implied that the Galactica crew became the ancestors of modern humanity.





The series is filmed at Vancouver Film Studios, and on physical locations in and around Vancouver, Kamloops and Kelowna, British Columbia, Canada.

After the failure of attempted continuations of the original Battlestar Galactica series by Tom DeSanto and Bryan Singer, and by original series star Richard Hatch, it was uncertain whether the series would be resurrected in any form. These previous attempts all involved using the original cast, or at least the original characters and plot. None of these projects proceeded beyond the developmental stage.
Then in 2002, Ronald D. Moore approached the Sci-Fi channel with an idea for a re-imagined version of the series. The Sci-Fi channel liked his darker vision of Battlestar Galactica, and commissioned a miniseries to act as a backdoor pilot, with the possibility of a regular television series thereafter.

Despite strong ratings for the miniseries, cost concerns led to uncertainty over whether the project would be expanded. Finally, British Sky Broadcasting offered to co-sponsor part of the first season's budget in return for early airing rights.[4] The first season of thirteen one-hour episodes was ordered by the Sci-Fi Channel on February 10, 2004. Produced in 2004 by David Eick and Ronald D. Moore, and starring the original cast from the 2003 miniseries, it began airing in the United Kingdom and Ireland on October 18, 2004. The series proved successful, attracting favorable comments from reviewers, and generating considerable anticipation in the US.
It began airing in North America three months later, on January 14, 2005 in the United States, and January 15 in Canada. The first episode aired in the US and became one of the highest-rated programs ever on Sci-Fi, with 3.1 million viewers. Successive episodes proved equally successful. The first episode of the regular series, "33", won the 2005 short-form Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation while the series as a whole was honored with a Peabody Award.
Battlestar Galactica's first episode was later made available for viewing in its entirety, and without charge from the Sci-Fi website. Moore also sought to address the "Internet Generation" by posting podcast commentaries on individual episodes on the official Sci-Fi website.
Moore left his position as producer on HBO's Carnivàle after its first season to concentrate more on BSG.

Following the success of the 13-episode Season One, the Sci-Fi Channel ordered a 20-episode second season on February 9, 2005. The season premiered in the US on the Sci-Fi Channel on July 15, 2005, with the UK, Ireland, and Canadian premiere in January, 2006. In the fall of 2005, airing of the second season halted, as it was part of Sci-Fi Channel's standard airing schedule normally used for its Stargate series, which was to split a 20-episode season into two parts (a "winter season" and a "summer season") to avoid heavy competition with major networks that follow a spring/fall schedule. Universal Home Video took this break as an opportunity to package the episodes aired thus far into a DVD set, calling it Season 2.0. The final episode of the first half, "Pegasus", was originally 15 minutes too long for broadcast, but according to creator Ronald Moore, the production team decided to cut the episode to time rather than pad it out to fill 90 minutes, as this was deemed impractical. The longer version of "Pegasus" appears on the Battlestar Galactica Season 2.5 DVD set, which was released in the US on September 19, 2006.[5] Sky did not contribute financially to the second season, though UK broadcasts credit the company at the end of every episode.
The second half of Season Two (Season 2.5) began airing on January 6, 2006, after a three-month hiatus, during which the Sci-Fi Channel mounted a huge publicity effort. Battlestar Galactica picked up considerable critical acclaim from the mainstream press, including being named the #1 show of 2005[6] by Time Magazine, and being listed on numerous Top Ten lists by publications such as the Boston Globe. The American Film Institute also named it one of the ten best television shows of 2005. There was some criticism that a few episodes following "Resurrection Ship, Part 2" were not up to par with previous episodes, such as the episode "Black Market", for which even Ron Moore expressed some disdain. Moore stated in his blog that he felt this was a result of the larger workload the series faced with twenty episodes, instead of thirteen in Season One. However, episode 15, "Scar", was thought to bring the series back up to its high level of quality, and subsequent episodes "The Captain's Hand", "Downloaded", and the two part finale "Lay Down Your Burdens", were hailed by fans and critics alike. Moore expressed that the longer break between Seasons Two and Three (seven months instead of two) would help to ensure that all episodes were up to the high level of quality that the production team strove to maintain.
Season Two was released on DVD in Australia on August 15, 2006. The entire season is collected in one box set. Season Two, however, began its first run on Australian television just two weeks prior to this on Network Ten, at 11pm on Wednesdays, meaning that the complete season became available the day before the third episode aired.

Ten "webisodes" called Battlestar Galactica: The Resistance were designed to focus on events that take place on New Caprica between seasons two and three of the television series, and aired on SciFi Pulse. Because of legal issues, almost no news appeared after the original announcement,[7] but the broadcast date was eventually revealed on August 28, 2006 on Sci-Fi's website by Sci-Fi's Head of Internet Programming, Craig Engler. The release schedule was twice a week, on Tuesdays and Thursdays. The first webisode was posted Tuesday, September 5, 2006, and the last posted on Thursday, October 5, 2006, one day before the first episode of Season Three.
The webisodes themselves have caused a conflict between NBC and those involved in their development, relating to the royalties that the developers should receive. NBC Universal, the major studio behind the reimagined series, refused to pay residuals to or credit the webisode writers on the grounds that the webisodes were promotional materials.[8] In response, Ronald D. Moore said he would no longer release any webisodes to the studio's custody. NBC Universal then took control of the webisodes, and filed an unfair labor-practices suit against the Writers Guild of America. The Guild told Moore and other NBC Universal television show producers to halt production of any further webisodes until a deal over residuals had been reached.[8]
The Resistance webisodes are included in the Region 1 DVD release of Season Three, and are expanded in content and running-time from their original online incarnation. They are not available on the Region 2 and Region 4 DVD releases.[9]

The Sci-Fi Channel ordered a 20-episode third season on November 16, 2005, which premiered in the US on October 6, 2006, and in Canada on October 7, 2006, with the first two episodes being shown together. The broadcast schedule for Season Three did not include a long hiatus in the middle of the season, as with Season Two. Production began in April 2006 in Vancouver, British Columbia.[10] The Sci-Fi Channel moved the show to Sundays on January 21, 2007, the first time the show had changed nights since it began airing.[11]
Season Three was broadcast in high-definition on Sky One HD in the UK and Ireland, starting on January 9, 2007, and in the US on Universal HD, starting on January 27, 2007.
After the initial five episode long New Caprica story arc, Season Three consisted of mostly stand-alone episodes. In the podcast for the Season Three finale, Ron Moore stated that in an effort to attract new viewers, the Sci-Fi Channel pressured the production team to make stand-alone episodes, instead of focusing on previously established storylines. However, this met with a negative critical reception, and Moore stated that by the end of Season Three, the critical reaction and declining ratings following this paradigm shift forced the Sci-Fi Channel to admit that stand-alone episodes simply do not work in the format that the series has established for itself, and Moore went on to say that because of this the Sci-Fi Channel promised that it would not put any pressure to make stand-alone episodes in Season Four.[12]
Moore and his production team routinely cited the network's "hands off" approach to the series as one of its strong points, the writers were being given free rein to do what they thought best in the first two seasons. This made the Sci-Fi Channel's intervention in the series especially unusual.
Moore infamously explained in the episode podcasts for season 1 that literally the only time Sci-Fi Channel asked him to change something in the first two seasons, was early in production when they were a bit uneasy about the extremely dark tone of the series, and asked if Moore could insert some lighter material, such as everyone having a birthday party for someone.[citation needed] The result was that Moore sa
