Wonderfalls
Wonderfalls is a television program that was featured on the Fox television network in 2004.
The show centres on Jaye Tyler (Caroline Dhavernas), a recent Brown University graduate with a philosophy degree, who holds a dead-end job as a sales clerk at a Niagara Falls gift shop. Jaye is the reluctant participant in conversations with various animal figurines — a wax lion, brass monkey, stuffed bear, and mounted fish, among others — which direct her via oblique instructions to help people in need.[1][2]
Some sources use the two-word spelling, "Wonder Falls", for the title. Although the DVD lists it as a single word, the title of its theme song is two words.

Originally scheduled to debut in the fall of 2003, its premiere was delayed until early 2004. When it finally debuted in March 2004, Wonderfalls received positive reviews from critics,[3][4][5] but had trouble attracting viewers. The pilot episode, “Wax Lion”, received a higher Nielsen rating when it was repeated the Thursday after its premiere, and the show was moved from a Friday night time slot to Thursday.[6] However, there was little notice or promotion of the time change, and the show was subsequently canceled after airing the fourth episode. (A fifth episode was advertised but never aired.)[7][8]
Immediately after the show's cancellation, its producers attempted to interest other networks, including The WB, in picking up the series. If they had been successful, Wonderfalls would have been the first American series in history to change networks in the midst of its first season. In addition, some episodes were shown in theatres in Los Angeles during the summer of 2004 in order to drum up support for the series.
The entirety of Wonderfalls was aired by the digital cable network Logo (TV channel) in the summer of 2005. The same summer, the British network Sky1 picked up Wonderfalls and aired the series to completion, though not in the original intended episode order.

Despite its cancellation Wonderfalls developed a loyal fanbase. A campaign spearheaded by fans (and an accompanying website) was launched, and several members of the cast and crew visited the site and encouraged the grassroots support.[9][10]
20th Century Fox released a DVD set of the full 13 episodes on February 1, 2005. The DVD set includes commentary by the producers and cast members on half the episodes, a behind-the-scenes documentary, an examination of the show’s visual effects, and one of the two music videos produced for the theme song, “I Wonder Why the Wonder Falls” by Andy Partridge. Wonderfalls has not yet been released on DVD outside of region 1.

The series was a United States/Canada co-production, filmed in Niagara Falls, Ontario and Toronto, Ontario,[11] and with several Canadian actors cast in lead roles (including the show’s star). It was created by Bryan Fuller (Dead Like Me, Pushing Daisies) and Todd Holland (Malcolm in the Middle) with executive producer Tim Minear (writer and director for Firefly and Angel). Lee Pace, who played Jaye’s brother, would later star in Pushing Daisies, another dramedy created by Fuller. Fuller has revealed that the second season of Pushing Daisies will include a "crossover" with Wonderfalls.[12] The crossover with Pushing Daisies was Beth Grant, who reprised her role as Marianne Marie Beetle from the episode "Muffin Buffalo" in the Pushing Daisies second season episode "Comfort Food".

Fox aired the first four episodes out of sequence, although the episodes were produced in a different order than was intended for broadcast.

Although the show's creators had intended for the 13 episodes of Wonderfalls to tell a standalone story, they discuss plans for second and third seasons in an interview featured on the 2005 DVD release of the series. Among the projected storylines mentioned on the DVD:


