Mars trilogy
The Mars trilogy is a series of award-winning science fiction novels by Kim Stanley Robinson, chronicling the settlement and terraforming of the planet Mars through the intensely personal and detailed viewpoints of a wide variety of characters spanning almost two centuries. Ultimately more utopian than dystopian, the story focuses on egalitarian, sociological, and scientific advances made on Mars, while Earth suffers from overpopulation and ecological disaster.
The three novels are Red Mars (1992), Green Mars (1993) and Blue Mars (1996). An additional collection of short stories and background information was published as The Martians (1999). The main trilogy won a number of prestigious awards.


Red Mars starts in 2026 with the first colonial voyage to Mars aboard the largest interplanetary spacecraft ever, the Ares, with a crew of the "First Hundred" colonists, composed for the most part of Russians and Americans. The book details the construction of the first settlement on Mars, called "Underhill". A debate among the colonists breaks out about the advisability of terraforming the planet, focusing on the two extreme views personified by Saxifrage "Sax" Russell who believes their very presence on the planet means some level of terraforming has already begun and it should be continued, a viewpoint held by "the Greens." Ann Clayborne represents "the Reds" viewpoint that mankind does not have the right to change entire planets at their will and Mars should be left in its original state. Hiroko Ai represents a middle ground, believing that a new way of living could evolve on Mars, a philosophy referred to as "Areophany".
The Greens eventually win out, through direct intervention in some cases, and the first steps to terraforming Mars start during the book. At the same time, new towns are developed across the planet, increasingly "open" as new technologies and materials allow pressure to be contained in new ways. However, due to the greed of the transnational corporations which come to dominate and control the nation states of Earth, the new Martian towns become overcrowded and undermaintained. Several cases of sabotage of terraformation infrastructure occur, blamed on anti-terraforming forces. The situation results in a violent revolution in 2061, in which many of the First Hundred are killed, and much of Mars' infrastructure, notably the space elevator, and Phobos, are destroyed. Most of the surviving members of the First Hundred are forced into hiding in the "underground", in this case a literal underground shelter created by Hiroko Ai under the Martian south pole.

Green Mars takes its title from the stage of terraforming that has taken place allowing plants to grow. It picks up the story from Red Mars, following the lives of the remaining First Hundred (and their children and grandchildren). Hiroko Ai's base under the south pole is attacked by UN forces and the survivors are forced to escape into a less literal underground known as the "demimonde". Among the expanded group are the First Hundred's children, the nisei, a number of whom live in Ai's second secret base, Zygote.
As unrest in the multinational control over Mars' affairs grow, various groups start to form with different aims and methods. Watching these groups evolve from Earth, the CEO of Praxis Corporation sends his representative, Arthur Randolph, to organize the resistance movements. This culminates into the Dorsa Brevia agreement, in which nearly all the underground factions take part. Preparations are made for a second revolution beginning in the 2120s.
The book follows the characters across the martian landscape, which is explained in detail. As Sax Russell's character infiltrates the transnat terraforming project, the newly evolving martian biosphere is described at great length. A mainstay of the novel is a detailed analysis of philosophical, political, economical, and geological experiences of the characters. The story weaves back and forth from character to character, providing a picture of Mars as seen by them.
One major event is a sudden, catastrophic rise in Earth's global sea levels, caused not by any greenhouse effect, but by the eruption of a chain of volcanoes underneath the ice of west Antarctica, disintegrating the ice sheet and displacing the fragments into the ocean.

Blue Mars takes its title from the stage of terraforming that has taken place allowing atmospheric pressure and temperature to increase so that liquid water can exist on the planet's surface, forming rivers and seas. It follows on from the end of Green Mars and has a much wider scope than the previous two books, covering an entire century after the second revolution and showing the spread of human settlements across the solar system — a process Robinson terms the Accelerando.

The Martians is a collection of short stories that takes place over the timespan of the original trilogy of novels, as well as some stories that take place in an alternate version of the novels where the First Hundred's mission was one of exploration rather than colonization. Buried in the stories are several hints about the eventual fate of the Martian terraforming program.

The author, Kim Stanley Robinson, uses a third person perspective throughout the entire series. We follow a multitude of characters who see the plot from different angles. This gives the reader a broad picture of the developments in the novels. The chapters are separated by "Arch" chapters which mark off the character the reader follows.
Another interesting aspect to his writing style is the protagonist/antagonist relationships. Because the series spans a period of 200 years, there are multiple characters that hold the title of protagonist. In contrast the antagonist position is only filled by one or two characters (depending on the readers perspective). More so, Robinson introduces a unique perspective on the protagonist/antagonist relationship. The transnational corporations which play an integral role in the series also match each other in this bond. Unlike the individual characters, this relationship lasts through all three books.
Robinson also does not just use the standard plot graph of build up, climax, and conclusion. The books delve into much more than one plot, each with its own time line and conclusion. But all of these fall under the great umbrella that defines the Mars Trilogy - the colonization of Mars. Such an example of this is relationships between characters in which end abruptly, only to be touched upon again much later in the story as a 'side note', but sufficiently reminds the reader that it did play a part in the development of the character.


Transnational corporations, nicknamed "transnats", are extremely powerful multinational corporations that first emerge in the mid-21st century. These multinational corporations have grown so large as a result of globalisation that they have sufficient economic power to take over or strongly manipulate national governments, initially only relatively small Third World governments, but later larger developed governments too. In Robinson's future history, the transnational corporations hence inherit the nation-state, continually to attempting to take over competitors in order to become the sole controller of the interplanetary market. As the Mars trilogy draws to a close, in the mid 22nd century, the transnational corporations are forced by a global catastrophe to concede more democratic powers to their workforces.
Although there are many transnational corporations mentioned, two play an active role in the development of the plotline. Praxis, a largely benevolent and relatively democratic firm, and Subarashii, which plays a large role in the maltreatment of the citizens of Mars.

The books also speculate on the colonization of other planets and moons in the solar system, and include descriptions of settlements or terraforming efforts on Callisto, Mercury, Titania, Miranda and Venus. Towards the end of the last book, humans are taking sub-light colony ships to other stars, taking advantage of the longevity treatments to survive to their destinations.
A great portion of Blue Mars is concerned with the effects of extreme longevity on its protagonists, most of whom have lived over two hundred years as a result of repeated longevity treatments. In particular, Robinson speculates on the psychological effects of ultra-longevity including memory loss, personality change, mental instability and boredom.


The initial colonists from the Ares who established a permanent colony. Many of them later become leaders or exemplary figures in the transformation of Mars or its new society.

An American astronaut, and the first man on Mars. He returns from Mars a public hero, and uses his considerable influence to lobby for a second mission, this time one of colonization. Boone received too much radiation on his first trip to make the second one, according to medical regulations; however, his celebrity status allows him to skirt this. On the second voyage, Boone is one of the 'First Hundred' colonists sent to permanently colonize Mars. His accomplishments and natural charm yield him an informal leadership role. In the first chapter of Red Mars, John Boone is assassinated by fundamentalists acting under the aegis of Frank Chalmers. The narrative then steps back to the First Hundred's voyage to Mars aboard the spaceship Ares. His ideas continue as a point of reference for the remainder of the trilogy. Boone's character is complex. In one light, Boone is a stereotypically simple, heroic figure, an everyman hero: his first words on his first trip to Mars are "Well, here we are". He is almost uniformly cheerful and good-natured, and approaches everything he undertakes with hale bonhomie. But later in Red Mars, Robinson switches to Boone's point of view, rather than showing him through others' eyes. This section reveals that late in life, Boone is addicted to omegendorph, a fictional drug that is based on endorphins in the human brain. In addition, it reveals that at least some of his seeming simplicity might simply be an act designed to further his political goals. Overall, Boone is presented as larger-than-life.

Head of the American contingent. He is Machiavellian in his use of power. However, his cynicism is later shown to be a form of self-defense; Chalmers is at least partly driven by a hidden idealistic side. Early in the voyage to Mars he became romantically involved with Maya Toitovna, the leader of the Russian contingent of the mission. During the second-half of the voyage, Maya became involved with John Boone. Already bitter that John was allowed to join the colonization mission despite his manipulations, Frank further despised John because of Maya's affection. His dislike culminates in his involvement in a plot to assassinate John, which ultimately succeeds. Frank later flees with Maya and other members of the Hundred to join the hidden colonists at the polar ice cap. He dies trying to save them when they get trapped in a flood unleashed from underground aquifers.

An emotional woman who is at the centre of a love triangle between Boone and Chalmers. She begins as head of the Russian contingent. The novels hint she used both wit and seduction to rise through the ranks of the Russian space agency to become the leader of the first colonization mission. After the first revolution she flees with other members of the Hundred to the hidden colony in the pole. She becomes a school teacher for the children of the hidden colonists, but later becomes a powerful political force. After the deaths of Chalmers and Boone, she falls in love with Michel Duval. She suffers heavily from amnesia and a bipolar disorder with growing age.

A Russian engineer who started out building nuclear reactors in 
