Montauk Project
The Montauk Project was alleged to be a series of secret United States government projects conducted at Camp Hero or Montauk Air Force Station on Montauk, Long Island for the purpose of developing psychological warfare techniques and exotic research including time travel.
Due to scant verifiable evidence to support its existence, critics argue the Montauk Experiment is an unverified conspiracy theory, urban legend or possibly a hoax.
No longer used as a military facility, the Montauk Air Force Station has been open to the public for several years. However, public access to the old military building is prohibited.

The earliest citation of the Montauk Project is uncertain, but elements of the story have circulated since at least the early 1980s. According to astrophysicist and UFO researcher Jacques Vallee, the Montauk Experiment stories seem to have originated with the account of Preston Nichols, who claimed to have recovered repressed memories of involvement. [1]
There is no definitive version of the Montauk Project narrative, but some accounts describe it as an extension or continuation of the Philadelphia Experiment.
Nikola Tesla
Preston Nichols
John von Neumann
Russell Targ
Duncan Cameron [disambiguation needed]
In 1943, the Philadelphia Experiment supposedly aimed to render the USS Eldridge optically invisible, with disastrous results. Though the story has circulated since the 1950s, skeptics note that Philadelphia Experiment accounts are unverified, and that the story was initially based largely on testimony of the mentally unstable Carl Allen.
According to proponents of the Montauk Project, surviving researchers from the Philadelphia Experiment met in 1952-1953. The researchers aimed to continue their earlier work on manipulating the "electromagnetic shielding" that had been used to make the USS Eldridge invisible, and investigating possible military applications magnetic field manipulation as a psychological warfare device.
Researchers purportedly created a report about their proposals, which was presented to the United States Congress and rejected as far too dangerous. By resubmitting their project directly to the United States Department of Defense and bypassing congressional approval, the researchers promised a powerful new weapon that could induce the symptoms of psychotic disorders and schizophrenia at the touch of a button. The Department of Defense approved. Funding supposedly came from a cache of US$10 billion in Nazi gold recovered from a train found by U.S. Army soldiers in a train tunnel in France, near the Swiss border. The train was blown up and all the soldiers involved were killed. When those funds ran out, additional funding was secured from ITT Corporation and Krupp AG in Germany.
Work began at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) on Long Island, New York under the name of the "Phoenix Project", but it was soon realized that the "project" required a large and advanced radar dish, and installing one at Brookhaven National Laboratory would compromise the security of the project. Luckily, the United States Air Force had a decommissioned base at Montauk, New York, not far from BNL, which had a complete SAGE radar installation. The site was large and remote and Montauk Point was not yet a tourist attraction. Water access would allow equipment to be moved in and out undetected. More importantly, the SAGE radar worked on a frequency of 400 MHz - 425 MHz, right in the range of 410 MHz - 420 MHz signal that was said to influence the human mind.
Equipment was moved to Camp Hero at Montauk AFS in 1967-1968, and installed in a "Deep Underground Military Base" that the National Security Agency (NSA) and the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) were redeveloping and expanding beneath Montauk AFS on the surface at Montauk Point. According to conspiracy theorists, to mask the nature of the project the site was closed in 1969 and donated as a wildlife refuge/park, with the provision that everything underground within the "D1 Base" would remain the property of the United States Air Force, although technically, in reality, Montauk AFS remained in operation until 1987. The park has never been opened to the public, under the excuse of "environmental contamination". (see Addendum below)
Various conspiracy theorists claim that experiments began in earnest from 1982 through to 1987-1988. They claim that during this time one, some or all of the following occurred at the site. The following claims are entirely unverified:
The site was opened to the public on September 18, 2002 as Camp Hero State Park. The radar tower has been placed on the State and National Register of Historic Places. There are plans for a museum and interpretive center, focusing on World War II and Cold War-era history.



The Montauk Project has appeared in a number of television shows and films, including:







Many books have been published on this subject, in particular the Montauk Project book series. There is also considerable crossover with the Philadelphia Experiment, so see that entry for more books on wider setting. Books that discuss aspects of the Montauk Project include:
