Medieval technology
Medieval technology refers to the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule. After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth.[1] The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder and the astrolabe, the invention of spectacles, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques, agriculture in general, clocks, and ships. The latter advances made possible the dawn of the Age of Exploration. The development of water mills was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone, probably derived from Roman technology. By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages in Britain had mills. They also were widely used in mining, as described by Georg Agricola in De Re Metallica for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.
European technical advancements in the 12th to 14th centuries were either native to Europe, usually from Roman antecedents, or adapted from cross-cultural exchanges through trading networks with the Islamic world, China, and India. Often, the revolutionary aspect lay not in the inventions themselves, but in their application to political and economic power. Though gunpowder had long been known to the Chinese, it was the Europeans who fully perfected its military potential, precipitating European expansion and eventual imperialism in the Modern Era.
Also significant in this respect were advances within the fields of navigation. The compass and astrolabe along with advances in shipbuilding, enabled the navigation of the World Oceans and thus domination of the worlds economic trade. Gutenberg’s printing press made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.
The technical drawings of Guido da Vigevano and Villard de Honnecourt can be viewed as medieval forerunners of later Renaissance works by artist-engineers such as Taccola or da Vinci.

A list of some important medieval technology. Circa is the approximate date or first mention of a technology in Medieval Europe. Technologies were often a matter of cultural exchange and date and place of first inventions are not listed here (see main links for a more complete history of each).



In the 15th century, the pace of technical advancements quickens with such diverse innovations like the printing press, linear perspectivity, patent law, double shell domes or bastions.




