Bohemian Club
The Bohemian Club is a prominent private club in San Francisco, California, USA.
Its clubhouse is located at 624 Taylor Street in San Francisco. Today, the club has a diverse membership of many prominent local and global leaders, ranging from artists and musicians to leading businessmen. Founded in 1872, it was modeled on New York's prominent Century Club.

The club was originally formed exclusively by and for journalists, who lamented the lack of art and culture in post-gold rush San Francisco and wanted to capture something of la vie bohème which had become popularized among the avant garde of the United States at the time. The group quickly relaxed its rules for membership to permit some people to join who had no artistic talent, but had major financial resources. Pretty soon, the "bohemian" writers were on their way out and the wealthy and powerful were in control of the club - something which remains true today. The membership lists are private, and only a few people outside of the club ever have seen them. Some prominent figures are given honorary membership only, such as Richard Nixon and William Randolph Hearst.
An early wealthy member was Nathaniel J. Brittan. In 1872 a remote hunting and party lodge was constructed by Brittan in San Carlos, about 15 miles south of San Francisco, for the use of the Bohemian club. The lodge is octagonal, three stories tall and topped by an octagonal cupola. The entire third story is a great room featuring an eight foot square brick fireplace with tin surfaced benches on the sides. The house still stands on its original foundation at 125 Dale Avenue, San Carlos and is occupied as a private residence. The house is listed on the National Register of Historic Places (Building #94001500)[1]. Over the years the house has suffered significant differential settling and leans forward from the hillside; it is in need of structural repairs if it is to remain a standing landmark.
In the early 1890's Brittan offered the Bohemian Club another prominent hill on his San Carlos property for their country retreat. It was to be called "Druid's Hill." Architect and fellow Bohemian member Willis Polk was to design and construct the retreat which they would have called "the Owl's Nest," loosely modeled after Haddon Hall in England. However, a political schism between the regular ticket and opposition members of the club ended with the project being abandoned. A cornerstone plaque that had been laid on the corner of Elizabeth Street and Orange Street in San Carlos was later removed and is now located at the Bohemian Grove on the Russian River.
Members have included some U.S. presidents (usually before they are elected to office), many cabinet officials, and CEOs of large corporations, including major financial institutions. Major military contractors, oil companies, banks (including the Federal Reserve), utilities, and national media have high-ranking officials as club members or guests. Many members are, or have been, on the board of directors of several of these corporations. However, artists and lovers of art are still among the most active members of the club, and the Club's bylaws still require that there be a certain number of artists, writers, and other academics.

Every year the club hosts an annual three week camp at Bohemian Grove, which is notable for its illustrious guest list and its eclectic Cremation of Care ceremony which mockingly burns "Care" (the normal woes of life) with grand pageantry, pyrotechnics and brilliant costumes, all done at the edge of a lake and at the base of a forty-foot 'stone' owl. In addition to that ceremony, there are also two outdoor performances (dramatic and comedic plays), often with elaborate set design and orchestral accompaniment. The more elaborate of the two is called High Jinks, the more ribald is called Low Jinks. More often than not, the productions are original creations of the "Talent" members but active participation of hundreds of members of all backgrounds is traditional.

On October 26, 2007, in Minneapolis, Minnesota, former President Bill Clinton was heckled during a speech by a man claiming that the September 11 attacks were a fraud and mentioning the Bohemian Club. Clinton denied the 9/11 claim and then sarcastically added, "Did you say the Bohemian Club? That's where all those rich Republicans go up and stand naked against redwood trees right? I've never been to the Bohemian Club but you oughta go. It'd be good for you. You'd get some fresh air." The heckler was escorted out of the hall as Clinton made his remarks.[2]




