Polynomial
In mathematics, a polynomial is an expression constructed from variables (also known as indeterminates) and constants, using the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and constant non-negative whole number exponents. For example, x2 − 4x + 7 is a polynomial, but x2 − 4/x + 7x3/2 is not, because its second term involves division by the variable x and also because its third term contains an exponent that is not a whole number.
Polynomials are one of the most important concepts in algebra and throughout mathematics and science. They are used to form polynomial equations, which encode a wide range of problems, from elementary word problems to complicated problems in the sciences; they are used to define polynomial functions, which appear in settings ranging from basic chemistry and physics to economics, and are used in calculus and numerical analysis to approximate other functions. Polynomials are used to construct polynomial rings, one of the most powerful concepts in algebra and algebraic geometry.

A polynomial is either zero, or can be written as the sum of one or more non-zero terms. The number of terms is finite. These terms consist of a constant (called the coefficient of the term) multiplied by zero or more variables (which are usually represented by letters). Each variable may have an exponent that is a non-negative integer. The exponent on a variable in a term is equal to the degree of that variable in that term. Since x = x1, the degree of a variable without a written exponent is one. A term with no variables is called a constant term, or just a constant. The degree of a constant term is 0. The coefficient of a term may be any number, including fractions, irrational numbers, negative numbers, and complex numbers.
For example,
is a term. The coefficient is –5, the variables are x and y, the degree of x is two, and the degree of y is one.
The degree of the entire term is the sum of the degrees of each variable in it. In the example above, the degree is 2 + 1 = 3.
A polynomial is a sum of terms. For example, the following is a polynomial:
It consists of three terms: the first is degree two, the second is degree one, and the third is degree zero. Here "− 5x" stands for "+ (−5)x", so the coefficient of the middle term is −5.
When a polynomial in one variable is arranged in the traditional order, the terms of higher degree come before the terms of lower degree. In the first term above, the coefficient is 3, the variable is x, and the exponent is 2. In the second term, the coefficient is –5. The third term is a constant. The degree of a non-zero polynomial is the largest degree of any one term. In this example, the polynomial has degree two.

An expression that can be converted to polynomial form through a sequence of applications of the commutative, associative, and distributive laws is usually considered to be a polynomial. For instance,
is a polynomial because it can be worked out to x3 + 3x2 + 3x + 1. Similarly,
is considered a valid term in a polynomial, even though it involves a division, because it is equivalent to  and  is just a constant. The coefficient of this term is therefore . For similar reasons, if complex coefficients are allowed, one may have a single term like (2 + 3i)x3; even though it looks like it should be worked out to two terms, the complex number 2+3i is in fact just a single coefficient in this case that happens to require a "+" to be written down.
Division by an expression containing a variable is not generally allowed in polynomials.[1] For example,
is not a polynomial because it includes division by a variable. Similarly,
is not a polynomial, because it has a variable exponent.
Since subtraction can be treated as addition of the additive opposite, and since exponentiation to a constant positive whole number power can be treated as repeated multiplication, polynomials can be constructed from constants and variables with just the two operations addition and multiplication.

A polynomial function is a function defined by evaluating a polynomial. A function ƒ of one argument is called a polynomial function if it satisfies
for all arguments x, where n is a nonnegative integer and a0, a1,a2, ..., an are constant coefficients.
For example, the function ƒ, taking real numbers to real numbers, defined by
is a polynomial function of one argument. Polynomial functions of multiple arguments can also be defined, using polynomials in multiple variables, as in
Polynomial functions are an important class of smooth functions.

A polynomial equation is an equation in which a polynomial is set equal to another polynomial.
is a polynomial equation. In case of a polynomial equation the variable is considered an unknown, and one seeks to find the possible values for which both members of the equation evaluate to the same value (in general more than one solution may exist). A polynomial equation is to be contrasted with a polynomial identity like (x + y)(x – y) = x2–y2, where both members represent the same polynomial in different forms, and as a consequence any evaluation of both members will give a valid equality.

Polynomials serve to approximate other functions, such as sine, cosine, and exponential.
All polynomials have an expanded form, in which the distributive law has been used to remove all brackets. All polynomials with real or complex coefficients also have a factored form in which the polynomial is written as a product of linear polynomials. For example, the polynomial
is the expanded form of the polynomial
which is written in factored form. Note that the constants in the linear polynomials (like -3 and +1 in the above example) may be complex numbers in certain cases, even if all coefficients of the expanded form are real numbers. This is because the field of real numbers is not algebraically closed; however, the fundamental theorem of algebra states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed.
In school algebra, students learn to move easily from one form to the other (see: factoring).
Every polynomial in one variable is equivalent to a polynomial with the form
This form is sometimes taken as the definition of a polynomial in one variable.
Evaluation of a polynomial consists of assigning a number to each variable and carrying out the indicated multiplications and additions. Evaluation is sometimes performed more efficiently using the Horner scheme
In elementary algebra, methods are given for solving all first degree and second degree polynomial equations in one variable. In the case of polynomial equations, the variable is often called an unknown. The number of solutions may not exceed the degree, and will equal the degree when multiplicity of solutions and complex number solutions are counted. This fact is called the fundamental theorem of algebra.
A system of polynomial equations is a set of equations in which a given variable must take on the same value everywhere it appears in any of the equations. Systems of equations are usually grouped with a single open brace on the left. In elementary algebra, methods are given for solving a system of linear equations in several unknowns. To get a unique solution, the number of equations should equal the number of unknowns. If there are more unknowns than equations, the system is called underdetermined. If there are more equations than unknowns, the system is called overdetermined. This important subject is studied extensively in the area of mathematics known as linear algebra. Overdetermined systems are common in practical applications. For example, one U.S. mapping survey used computers to solve 2.5 million equations in 400,000 unknowns.[2]

In linear algebra, the characteristic polynomial of a square matrix encodes several important properties of the matrix.
In graph theory the chromatic polynomial of a graph encodes the different ways to vertex color the graph using x colors.
In abstract algebra, one may define polynomials with coefficients in any ring.
In knot theory the Alexander polynomial, the Jones polynomial, and the HOMFLY polynomial are important knot invariants.

Determining the roots of polynomials, or "solving algebraic equations", is among the oldest problems in mathematics. However, the elegant and practical notation we use today only developed beginning in the 15th century. Before that, equations are written out in words. For example, an algebra problem from the Chinese Arithmetic in Nine Sections, circa 200 BCE, begins "Three sheafs of good crop, two sheafs of mediocre crop, and one sheaf of bad crop are sold for 29 dou." We would write 3x + 2y + z = 29.

The earliest known use of the equal sign is in Robert Recorde's The Whetstone of Witte, 1557. The signs + for addition, − for subtraction, and the use of a letter for an unknown appear in Michael Stifel's Arithemetica integra, 1544. René Descartes, in La géometrie, 1637, introduced the concept of the graph of a polynomial equation. He popularized the use of letters from the beginning of the alphabet to denote constants and letters from the end of the alphabet to denote variables, as can be seen above, in the general formula for a polynomial in one variable, where the a 's denote constants and x denotes a variable. Descartes introduced the use of superscripts to denote exponents as well.[3]

Every polynomial corresponds to a polynomial function, where f(x) is set equal to the polynomial, and to a polynomial equation, where the polynomial is set equal to zero. The solutions to the equation are called the roots of the polynomial and they are the zeroes of the function and the x-intercepts of its graph. If x = a is a root of a polynomial, then (x − a) is a factor of that polynomial.
Some polynomials, such as f(x) = x2 + 1, do not have any roots among the real numbers. If, however, the set of allowed candidates is expanded to the complex numbers, every (non-constant) polynomial has at least one distinct root; this follows from the fundamental theorem of algebra.
There is a difference between approximating roots and finding exact roots. Formulas for the roots of polynomials up to a degree of 2 have been known since ancient times (see quadratic equation) and up to a degree of 4 since the 16th century (see Gerolamo Cardano, Niccolo Fontana Tartaglia). But formulas for degree 5 eluded researchers. In 1824, Niels Henrik Abel proved the striking result that there can be no general formula (involving only the arithmetical operations and radicals) for the roots of a polynomial of degree 5 or greater in terms of its coefficients (see Abel-Ruffini theorem). This result marked the start of Galois theory which engages in a detailed study of relationships among roots of polynomials.
Numerically solving a polynomial equation in one unknown is easily done on a computer by the Durand-Kerner method or by some other root-finding algorithm. The reduction of equations in several unknowns to equations each in one unknown is discussed in the article on the Buchberger's algorithm. The special case where all the polynomials are of degree one is called a system of linear equations, for which a range of different solution methods exist, including the classical gaussian elimination.
It has been shown by Richard Birkeland and Karl Meyr that the roots of any polynomial may be expressed in terms of multivariate hypergeometric functions. Ferdinand von Lindemann and Hiroshi Umemura showed that the roots may also be expressed in terms of Siegel modular functions, generalizations of the theta functions that appear in the theory of elliptic functions. These characterizations of the roots of arbitrary polynomials are generalizations of the methods previously discovered to solve the quintic equation.

A polynomial function in one real variable can be represented by a graph.
Polynomial graphs are analyzed in calculus using intercepts, slopes, concavity, and end behavior.
The illustrations below show graphs of polynomials.

One important aspect of calculus is the project of analyzing complicated functions by means of approximating them with polynomials. The culmination of these efforts is Taylor's theorem, which roughly states that every differentiable function locally looks like a polynomial, and the Stone-Weierstrass theorem, which states that every continuous function defined on a compact interval of the real axis can be approximated on the whole interval as closely as desired by a polynomial. Polynomials are also frequently used to interpolate functions.
Quotients of polynomials are called rational expressions, and functions that evaluate rational expressions are called rational functions. Rational functions are the only functions that can be evaluated on a computer by a fixed sequence of instructions involving operations of addition, multiplication, division, which operations on floating point numbers are usually implemented in hardware. All the other functions that computers need to evaluate, such as trigonometric functions, logarithms and exponential functions, must then be computed in software that may use approximations to those functions on certain intervals by rational functions, and possibly iteration.
Calculating derivatives and integrals of polynomials is particularly simple. For the polynomial
the derivative with respect to x is
and the indefinite integral is

In abstract algebra, one must take care to distinguish between polynomials and polynomial functions. A polynomial f in one variable X over a ring R is defined to be a formal expression of the form
where n is a natural number, the coefficients  are elements of R, Here X is a formal symbol, whose powers Xi are at this point just placeholders for the corresponding coefficients ai, so that the given formal expression is just a way to encode the sequence (a0,a1,...), where there is an N such that ai=0 for all i>N. Two polynomials sharing the same value of n are considered to be equal if and only if the sequences of their coefficients are equal; furthermore any polynomial is equal to any polynomial with greater value of n obtained from it by adding terms in front whose coefficient is zero. These polynomials can be added by simply adding corresponding coefficients (the rule for extending by terms with zero coefficients can be used to make sure such coefficients exist). Thus each polynomial is actually equal to the sum of the terms used in its formal expression, if such a term aiXi is interpreted as a polynomial that has zero coefficients at all powers of X other than Xi. Then to define multiplication, it suffices by the distributive law to describe the product of any two such terms, which is given by the rule
