DeviantArt
DeviantART (trademarked deviantART[1]) is an American international online community for artists. It was first launched on August 7, 2000 by Angelo Sotira, Scott Jarkoff, and Matthew Stephens, amongst others. DeviantART, Inc. is headquartered on Hollywood Boulevard in the Hollywood area of Los Angeles, California, United States.[2] As of February 2009[update] the site consists of over 10 million members, over 75 million submissions, and receives around 100,000 submissions per day.[3] The domain deviantart.com attracted at least 36 million visitors annually by 2008 according to a Compete.com study.[4]
DeviantART aims to provide a place for any artist to exhibit and discuss works. Works are organized in a comprehensive category structure, including photography, digital art, traditional art, literature, Flash, filmmaking, and skins for applications, among others, along with extensive downloadable resources such as tutorials and stock photography. "Fella," a small, robotic, cat character, is the official DeviantART mascot.

DeviantArt was originally launched in August 2000 by Angelo Sotira, Scott Jarkoff, and Matt Stephens as part of a larger network of music-related websites called the Dmusic Network. The site flourished largely because of its unique offering and the contributions of its core member base and a team of volunteers after its launch,[5] but was officially incorporated in 2001 about 8 months after launch.
DeviantArt was loosely inspired by projects like Winamp facelift, customize.org, deskmod.com, screenphuck.com, and skinz.org, all application skin-based websites. Sotira entrusted all public aspects of the project to Scott Jarkoff as an engineer and visionary to launch the early program. All three co-founders shared backgrounds in the application skinning community, but it was Matt Stephens whose major contribution to DeviantArt was the suggestion to take the concept further than skinning and more toward an "art community." Many of the individuals involved with the initial development and promotion of DeviantART still hold positions with the project, from administrators to volunteers serving as gallery directors and Message Network Administration. Angelo Sotira currently serves as the CEO of DeviantArt, Inc.[6]

The following terms are used throughout the site:

Several forums and a shoutbox exist within DeviantART. Users can enter their longitude and latitude, and locate other deviants living nearby. (This feature is currently disabled.)[citation needed]

Every user has a personal page at the URL http://username.deviantART.com, where username is replaced by her/his username. This page may list the user's interests, mood, hobbies and so forth. It also exhibits the deviant's four most recent works (although deviants who have paid for a subscription may change this number to as few as two to as many as ten) and his or her 'favourites'. Deviants may also select and display their most prized work as a 'Featured Deviation'. Each deviant can edit their own public journal. The journal is similar to a blog in that a deviant may write an entry and it will be displayed on their user page. Journals are very useful for expressing the thoughts of a user, or the soon to occur events that would affect his/her watchers. Another feature of the User page is the commentary that may be supplied by the user or other members. This allows for thanks, public hellos, and so forth.

As of November 2007, users have the option to create folders. These folders allow deviant art users to customize their gallery. The folders can consist of deviations from various categories or different styles. These folders are used to make various deviations more accessible.[10]

Any user may add another user's deviation to their favourites. This will place the deviation on that user's favourites on their personal page where the user can view it at any time. Other users can view anyone's favourites also giving the original artist extra exposure. Folders can be made in the favourites section, where the user can name the folder and put deviations in it, organizing their favourites. A recently added feature ("Collection") allows deviations to be instantly added by clicking and dragging it, which will bring up the folders, which the user can drop the deviation into. Another new feature allows deviants to view others' Collections via a link in the main toolbar. Users may choose to display the most recent two-four favourites, or randomly display two-four of their selected favourites on their userpage.

Users can add any user to a watchlist called DeviantWatch (unless the watcher has been blocked by the user selected to be watched). Doing so will cause the watcher to be notified every time anyone on their watch list submits a new piece of art, submits a new journal entry, or, more recently, submits a News article; one can also select to be notified of the submission of scraps. These notifications may be toggled in the 'Friends List', where deviants are also allowed to group or remove watched deviants, along with whether or not they class the watched user a friend. Those selected as "friends" are shown in a small box on the watcher's userpage.[11]

When a user is watching a deviant, has submitted a work, or is participating in a note, a link is provided on the bar which is supporting the user's name, logout button, and collect option. It will distincly give a number followed by either "deviation/s," "message/s," or "note/s." By pressing the link with "deviation," the user is brought to a page which lists all new deviations of those they are watching. This is one of the three parts of what is known as the "message centre." Once there, the user may press the title of a work, view it, comment or favorite, and return to the message centre to mark work as "read." Also on that page are the options "Delete all..." and "Select all."
After finishing up on the new deviation page, the user may either hit one of the tabs near the top of the page or hit the link provided on the previously mentioned bar. There are then only two other options: message/s or note/s. If the new message/s link/tab is selected, a list of comments, journals, polls, and news submissions is provided. The list of comments show members' comments on the user's works, user page, or journals, or replies to the user's comments on someone else's journal, work, or user page. By pressing the link marked by the word "comment" followed by a number sign and a series of numbers, the user will be directly taken to the comment. After replying to the comment, the mention of it is instantly removed from the user's message centre. By hitting the title of a journal, the user is taken to the journal to read and comment. However, much unlike the comment section, once the journal is read or commented upon, the user must go to the message centre and remove it by hand. By this process of deletion by hand, any unwanted comments, journals, polls, and news article links can be removed instantly. A final feature of this comment tab is the box at the very bottom of the page that provides a link to any new notes that the user has received.
Though it is possible to simply select the note tab or the note link in the box towards the top of the page, this extra feature allows to user to know immediately who sent the note and what the subject of it is. If it is undesirable to access the note at that particular moment, it may be ignored or removed from the message centre. The problem is that this will not permanently delete the note. It will still reside in the user's note section. The user must access this section to remove it or organize it into a file. The creation of files in the note section is a special feature that would allow a system of organization in the user's inbox.

Users can write news articles to report about contests, events, interesting news, external links, or even just a collection of artwork they want to display. DeviantART makes a strict point about what is and is not news, and what should be left in user's personal journal. When a deviant posts a news article, his or her "watchers" receive a notification in their Message Centre. Administrators post official news articles through this system as well, and they are sometimes delivered to the whole community's Message Centre.

DeviantART has a series of forums. Some are more generalized, such as the Deviants forum, which is for general discussions that do not fit into any of the other forums. Some forums, like the DeviantART Status Forum, restrict posting by anybody other than an administrator. There are also specific forums, such as the Beta Tester Feedback Forum and the ThumbShare Forum (for sharing thumb nails of art work).

There is also an AdCast program, for advertising art and community-related products/pages at a discounted rate.[12]

DeviantART offers a subscription based service with extra features and privileges.[13]
Subscribed Deviant features include the ability to browse the site with no advertisements, greater customization of a user's personal page, including the ability to upload the user's own Cascading Style Sheets for use in their journal. deviantMOBILE is a feature that allows most deviations to be downloaded onto one's mobile phone, though this won't work on all phones or all carriers. There are private forums and a beta testing feature for those with subscriptions. The ability to search artwork on the site with up to 120 images per page is also enabled.[13]
A subscriber "portfolio page" service is currently in development, with the competition for the creation of the portfolio page template already over. The portfolio page is intended to provide artists with a display page that appears more professional than the standard gallery. Users may use this to show potential employers their artwork.[13]
Subscriptions can be purchased in three month and one year lengths. However, some members, predominantly the staff and former staff, attain a subscription that continues " 'til Hell Freezes Over", meaning that their subscription never ends.

This feature was originally DeviantART Prints. Users who have bought a prints account for an annual fee of $24.95 USD (originally it was a one-time fee) may sell their work, printed onto a variety of media such as mugs, jigsaw puzzles, canvases, calendars, mouse pads, coasters, postcards, and magnets. Users earn 50% of the profits above a pre-set "base cost."[14] For example, the base price for a 4x6 inch print is $0.32. If a user sells it for $2.00, he would get $0.84. A user who does not have a standard prints account would get $0.32, the pre-set price for 4x6s.
Prints II, the newest remake of the system, will be launched in stages, the first having already taken place in November 2006. New features include a basic print account for all members (paying print account owners with added features), new products available such as T-Shirts, and an annual fee instead of the original one-time fee.[15]

The DeviantART Messaging Network (or "dAmn") is the real-time chat system implemented on DeviantART version 4 on August 7, 2004.[16] Through dAmn users can join one of many existing channels and also create their own. It is based on a proprietary protocol and chat server application, much like Internet Relay Chat, and is not compatible with other chat systems. The client end is either a Flash or Java application, or Mozilla extension for server communication, coupled with a JavaScript backend to handle the messages.
Only hours after the release dAmn, the protocol had been reverse engineered and publicized. The same night, a first working Perl client was made available.[17] Today users have a choice of clients for various operating systems, written in different languages, and with more or improved features over the official client. The official client, while flash/java based, has limited cross-browser support. Very few Opera users, for example, report any success in using it. Firefox is seemingly the most compatible browser for viewing the site.
Chat rooms on dAmn are referred to with a number sign before their name. Some channels host events and have live interviews with artists. There are official chat rooms on the DeviantART messaging network, some of which include #devart and #help. "#devart" is the name of the official channel of the site, and as a direct result tends to contain the greatest user volume. The number of channels has increased significantly since then. #help is the official DeviantART assistance channel. It is meant to act as an instant form of DeviantART's Help Desk, providing users with various forms of site-related aid instead of using email. #help is known for being operated by volunteers from the site itself.[7]

DeviantART is becoming more integrable with blogs through the use of RSS feeds and "Pasties". These features allow a user to post content on their blog(s) that will update as they submit new deviations to DeviantART. Pasties can be modified to show a user's favourites, recent submissions, a particular category of artwork, and more. RSS also allows anyone to subscribe to gallery feeds so they can be notified when their favorite artists submit new deviations. RSS used by DeviantART implements Media RSS specification which allows easier syndication of media content. [8]

The newest feature on DeviantART is a slide-show application called SitBack. Launched as a public alpha on November 5, 2008, the new feature allows DeviantART users to view pictures on a pop-up slide-show player by clicking on a projector screen button within browse and search pages, the collections page, the channels page, footer channels, the Daily Deviations page, and deviants' galleries, favourites and collections. SitBack also features crossfade transitions, panning effects, keyboard shortcuts, and URL sharing. It currently does not display films, Flash animations, literature, and DeviantWatch feeds.[18]

On November 14, 2006, DeviantART gave its users the option to submit their works under Creative Commons licenses giving the artists the right to choose how their works can be used.[19]
On September 30, 2007, a film category was added to DeviantART, allowing artists to upload videos. An artist and other viewers can add annotations to sections of the film, giving comments or critiques to the artist about a particular moment in the film.[20]

DeviantART has been revising the site in versions, releasing multiple features at once. After version 2, versions were released on the date of site's birthday, August 7, excluding Version 6.
Version 2, released on February 5, 2002. In version 2, browsing was made easier.[21]
Version 3, released on August 7, 2003.[22]
Version 4, released on August 7, 2004. In version 4, the chat client called dAmn was added to the site.[16]
Version 5 was released on August 7, 2006.[23] In version 5, each deviant has a Prints account, through which they may sell prints of their works for money, receiving 20% of the profits. Users can also obtain Premium Prints Account offering 50% of the profits and an immediate check of material submitted for sales. Before version 5 of DeviantART, users did not have by default access to this service and it had to be obtained separately. By paying for a subscription, a deviant could also sell their work for 50% of each sale.
Version 6, released on July 10, 2008. In this revision, the message center, front page and footer were revamped. Users are now able to customize the deviantART navigation toolbar. The design style of the site was slightly modified as well.[24]
