Bone (comics)
Bone is an independently published comic book series, originally serialized in 55 irregularly-released issues from 1991 to 2004. Bone was drawn and written by Jeff Smith.
Smith's black-and-white drawings were inspired by animated cartoons and comic strips, a notable influence being Walt Kelly's Pogo: "I was … a big fan of Carl Barks and Pogo, so it was just natural for me to want to draw that kind of mixture of Walt Kelly and Moebius."[1] Accordingly, the story is singularly characterized by an effective combination of both light-hearted comedy and dark, epic fantasy: Time Magazine has called the series "as sweeping as the Lord of the Rings cycle, but much funnier."[2]
Bone has received numerous awards, among them ten Eisner Awards[3][4][5][6][7] and eleven Harvey Awards.[8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15][16] The 1,342 page compilation was put on Time magazine's list of Top Ten Graphic Novels of All Time.[17]

The series centers around the Bone Family, white, bald cartoon caricatures with big noses who seldom wear much clothing. In the opening pages the three Bone cousins—avaricious Phoncible P. "Phoney" Bone, goofy cigar-smoking Smiley Bone, and everyman character Fone Bone—are run out of their hometown of Boneville after Phoney decides to run for mayor with disastrous results. After crossing a desert and ending up in the mysterious Valley, the cousins are separated by a sea of locusts, and must individually make their way across the fantasy landscape pursued by rat creatures. They joyously reunite at a local village called Barrelhaven, where they are taken in by a mysterious girl named Thorn and her even more enigmatic grandmother. Fone Bone instantly develops a crush on Thorn when he meets her, and repeatedly attempts to prove his love through poetry. As they stay longer in the valley, they encounter humans and other creatures who are threatened by a decrepit dark lord, the Lord of the Locusts. The Bones are quickly drawn into the events around them, compelling them on a hero's journey to help save the world.
Although Boneville is never actually shown in the story, it is implied as technologically contemporary: Fone refers to its extensive downtown, Phoney carries dollar bills, and Smiley refers to the presence of nuclear reactors and a CornDogHut.TM In contrast, the Valley is depicted as somewhat medieval, judging by its lifestyle, weapons and modes of transportation, and Phoney persistently refers to the valley people as "yokels."
Although essentially a high fantasy, Bone also displays slapstick humor, particularly in The Great Cow Race (issue #10) and Phoney Bone's ongoing efforts to become rich off the credulous valley residents. As the series progresses to graver issues and a more epic level, its characteristic use of broad humor lessens but continues to recur.

Most of the series was self-published by Smith under his Cartoon Books imprint from 1991 to 2004, but for a short time was published by Image Comics. During this time, the first 20 issues were reprinted by Image with new covers. These reprints are identifiable by having reproductions of the original covers on the back. The Cartoon Books printings have black back covers, inset with a single panel reprinted from inside. First printings can be distinguished from later printings by changes in the color of the logo on the front cover. The comic and its story ended with its 55th issue, dated June 2004. The back cover has, in place of the usual comic panel, a black and white photo of Smith in his studio drawing the last page on May 10. In an interview on Attack of the Show, Smith revealed that he drew the last page very early on.[18] The 55 issues have been collected into the following volumes.

Issues from the Out From Boneville collection were also reprinted in the digest-sized children's magazine Disney Adventures, first in 1994 and later in 1997 through 1998. The issues usually consisted of 7–9 pages a month and were coloured and censored to remove smoking and drinking references, and removing any sexual innuendoes involving Thorn and Fone Bone[citation needed]. There was also an exclusive story for Disney Adventures by Smith, featuring Fone and Phoney following a "treasure map."

From February 2004 to January 2009, Scholastic Inc. (through its new Graphix imprint) began reissuing in both hardcover and soft the individual volumes in full color by Steve Hamaker. In 2006, HarperCollins began publishing the full color editions for the UK market.[19] These editions also correct some spelling errors, i.e., "kewpie-doll" for "cupie-doll" and "kowtow" for "cowtow."

The special 1,332 page, one volume edition (ISBN 1-888963-14-X) was released originally for $40 (USD) through Jeff Smith's Cartoon Books imprint in a paperback volume. This special print of the entire adventure was to celebrate the recent end of the series and the commencement of every collection in the series being reprinted in color through Scholastic Press. First released in 2004 and promoted as only a limited print run being available, this edition has recently returned to print.
In addition to the one volume paperback, a signed limited edition hardcover edition of the one volume book was issued. The deluxe hardcover featured gold embossed lettering on the cover, gilded edges, and a cloth ribbon bookmark. The end pages are printed with a map of The Valley and it comes with a full-color signed and numbered bookplate. This limited edition pressing of the book originally sold for around $125 (USD) and was initially limited to 2,000 copies.
The collection won the 2005 Eisner Award for Best Graphic Album Reprint.[20], and was listed at #3 in Time magazine's "Best Comix of 2004". Reviewer Andrew Arnold said of the collection, which was published at the conclusion of the monthly series, "As sweeping as the Lord of the Rings cycle, but much funnier...Smith imbues even simple dialogue panels with animation. Now that it's finished Bone should join the ranks of Lord of the Rings and Harry Potter in the young adult pantheon."[2]


Both prequels to the main storyline, but can be read without spoiling too much about the main story.
In a recent interview, Jeff talked about another "Big Johnson Bone" adventure that may be forthcoming.[citation needed] Big Johnson Bone is the lead character from "Stupid, Stupid Rat Tails".

(1993, Warrior Publications, 14 pages) This was a Hero Premiere Edition bundled with Hero Illustrated magazine. It includes a short story where the Bone cousins celebrate Winter Solstice, Jeff Smith interview and sketches.
(Jan 1995, Wizard, 28 pages) This was a free comic book mail-in offer through Wizard Magazine. As was also common with Wizard Magazine comic offers, there was a special gold foil cover variant where the Bone title on the cover is embossed in gold foil. It came in a rigid mylar sleeve and a certificate of authenticity. There is a short story that fits in between #13 and #14 of the regular series, and is included in Bone Vol. 2: The Great Cow Race. This special also includes a Jeff Smith interview and sketches.
(1995, Image Comics, 16 pages with wrap-around cover) This was a free promotional book given out at 1995 San Diego Comic-con and it also polybagged with Wizard Mag. This sourcebook was published to celebrate the move of the BONE series from self-publishing to Image Comics, where it stayed for only 7 issues before Jeff Smith took it back to self-publishing.
It includes an Introduction by Jeff Smith & biography, character profiles, color poster by Jim Lee, story timeline, upcoming storyline, and shipping schedule.
(2001, Cartoon Books)
To celebrate its 10th year anniversary, a special color edition of Bone #1 with was released with a free collectible Fone Bone PVC figure and a full color Phoney Bone Gazillion dollar bill. This special edition included a new cover, a new afterword by Jeff Smith, and an illustrated eight-page commentary by comics historian R.C. Harvey, and the original artwork was digitally remastered in full color.



Manipulative and greedy Phoney Bone will do anything to get rich. Run out of Boneville by an angry mob of villagers after a few shady business deals, his greediness and selfishness makes an enemy of anyone who crosses him in the valley. Referred to as "The One Who Bears The Star" (due to the star t-shirt he wears) by the Hooded One, Phoney is sought after by the Rat Creature army though he does not know why (later it's revealed that the Hooded One erroneously believed a giant balloon of Phoney used in his campaign for mayor of Boneville that fell in her lair to be an omen that Phoney could be used to fulfill her agenda). Fone says that part of the reason for his cousin's resourcefulness and greed may be that Phoney, as the oldest of the Bone trio, raised his two cousins when they were young — and poor — orphans. Though he is selfish he is very defensive of his cousins when he needs to be and shows he really cares about them. An example is given when he is approached by The Hooded One who proceeds to threaten Fone Bone, Phoncible becomes angry and warns The Hooded One to stay away from Fone. He also shows his jest side, despite his complaining the whole story, by appearing to run away in the last battle, only to come back in armor with reinforcements ready for battle. To his dismay, they arrive right as the battle ended. However he still claims himself as a hero.








