Conditional comment
Conditional comments are proprietary conditional statements interpreted by Microsoft Internet Explorer in HTML source code. Conditional comments first appeared in Microsoft's Internet Explorer 5 browser and is supported through at least version 8.[1]
Conditional comments can be used to provide and hide code to and from Internet Explorer.
There are two types of "conditional comment", downlevel revealed, and downlevel hidden.

Here is a simple example that demonstrates how conditional comments work.

Below are two examples of a "downlevel hidden" conditional comment:
or
The tag in the first example will let IE 7 read the specified CSS file while IE 6 or less will ignore it. Browsers other than IE will also ignore it because it looks like a standard HTML comment. The tag in the second example will let IE versions 5.0 through 7 read the internal CSS style. With different uses of this tag you can also single out IE 6, IE 5, or versions of IE that are greater or lesser than a specified version.

Below is an example of a "downlevel revealed" conditional comment:
This is recommended by Microsoft for when the content should be exposed to non-IE browsers.
Microsoft acknowledges this method is not standardized markup for comments,[2] intending these tags to be overlooked by other browsers and expose the content in the middle. Some web developers use an alternative technique[3] for downlevel-revealed conditional comments in order to only use markup that appears less irregular.
This method has the drawback that if the condition evaluates to true (for example, if writing code meant to display on non-IE browsers and on some versions of IE), IE will then display the "-->" present before the HTML content. This is easily solved by prepending "<!" to the initial "-->" as follows:
The extra "<!" is ignored by non-IE browsers; it is also ignored by IE regardless of the condition because if false, everything within the conditional comment is ignored, and if true, the resulting tag "<!-->" is unrecognized and therefore ignored.
While this method is functional in current versions of Internet Explorer, there is no guarantee that future versions will continue to operate this way.

Starting with Internet Explorer 4, there exists a similar proprietary mechanism for adding conditional comments within JScript, known as Conditional Compilation.[4]
Code examples:
There are also several predefined variables[1].


