Roadside Picnic
Roadside Picnic (Russian: –ü–∏–∫–Ω–∏–∫ –Ω–∞ –æ–±–æ—á–∏–Ω–µ, pronounced [p ≤ikÀàn ≤ik na …êÀàbot…ï…™n ≤e]) is a science fiction short novel written in 1971 by Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, published in 1972 and since deemed a classic. The film Stalker directed by Andrei Tarkovsky is loosely based on the novel, with a screenplay written by the Strugatskys.

Aliens have visited the Earth, and departed, leaving behind a number of artifacts of their incomprehensibly advanced technology. The places where such artifacts were left behind are areas of great danger, known as "Zones." The Zones are laid out in a pattern which suggests that they resulted from the impact of an influence from space which struck repeatedly from the same direction, striking different places as the Earth rotated on its axis.
A frontier culture arises along the margins of these Zones, studded with space-time anomalies and peopled by "stalkers" who risk their lives in illegal expeditions to recover the artifacts, which do not obey known physical laws. The one most sought after, the "golden ball", is rumored to have the power to fulfill the deepest human wishes.
The novel's main protagonist is stalker Redrick "Red" Schuhart, initially employed as a lab assistant at the Harmont branch of the International Institute for Extraterrestrial Cultures, near the edge of Canada's Zone. He leads an expedition in search of a valuable artifact, as a result of which one of his colleagues is indirectly killed by an anomaly. Red later discovers that his girlfriend Guta is pregnant and wants to keep the child, despite rumours of monstrous births as a result of stalkers' exposure to the Zone's mutagen effect. They marry, against the wishes of Guta's family, and she gives birth to a mutant daughter, driving Red into the Zone one last time in order to find the golden sphere.
The name of the novel derives from a metaphor proposed by the character Dr. Valentine Pilman, who compares the visit to a roadside picnic. After the picnickers depart, nervous animals venture forth from the adjacent forest and discover the picnic garbage: spilled motor oil, faded unknown flowers, a box of matches, a clockwork teddy bear, balloons, candy wrappers, etc. He concludes that humankind finds itself in a situation similar to that of the curious forest animals.

Although the accident happened 14 years after the publication of Roadside Picnic, the area affected by Chernobyl disaster has become analogous to the Zones in the Strugatskys' novel in the former Soviet Union.
Humans are not supposed to live within 30 km (19 miles) of the disaster site, giving rise to a 3,600-square-kilometre (1,400†sq†mi) region formally referred to as the Zone of alienation, and informally known as "The Zone." The Zone, straddling the Ukraine-Belarus border, contains the two ghost cities Prypiat and Chernobyl as well as many ghost villages. It has, unexpectedly, become a major nature reserve. As in the novel, the Zone attracts illegal scavenging.





