Tecktonik
Tecktonik is a form of dance based on a blend of techno styles (late 80s vogue, 90s waving and old school breakdancing), started in the early 2000s in Paris, France, at the club Metropolis.[1] [2]The music Tecktonik is usually danced to is electro house. Tecktonik has not yet succeeded in creating its own music genre, even though multiple attempts have been made. It has grown in popularity through word-of-mouth and video sharing sites such as Dailymotion and YouTube.
The term Tecktonik is also a registered trademark, and this has created issues for dance events or other uses of the name[3]. However, Tecktonik is not a music style. The creators of the Tecktonik brand (most notably, Cyril Blanc, the artistic director of Metropolis[4]) sell official products, such as clothes, CDs, energy drinks, etc. Typical dress for Tecktonik dancers include tight-fitting jackets and slim-fit jeans. Dancers also tend to have "futuristic", sometimes even gothic hair cuts and sometimes wear make-up designs such as a star around one eye. The neon colours on shirts are linked to the London Nu Rave fashion scene.
Tecktonik borrows heavily from elements of glowsticking, and hip-hop dance moves including popping and locking. Tecktonik was featured prominently at the 2007 Paris Techno Parade on September 15.[4]
The song Alive by Mondotek has been named the official anthem for Tecktonik in France.[citation needed]


Tecktonik has arrived in Mauritius in 2007. A big Tecktonik night was organized at Domaine Sam on the 18 July 2008 with the presence of Jey-Jey, Lilian Azian and Karmapa. A Tecktonik dance competition starting on the 28 June up to 18 July at the Kitsch Pub was organised by The Hippies Ltd and Bluesteel with the final taking place on July 18, 2008 at Midnight Express in Mon Choisy. The winner would have the privileged to dance with Jey-Jey, Lilian Azian and Karmapa during the big night of July 18, 2008.[5]

The first music video featuring choreagraphed Tecktonik dancing was Lorie's Je Vais Vite. The singer became a symbol of the movement and went on to feature the dance in her next music video, Play.[citation needed]

