Compersion
Types of relationships
Boyfriend졖 Casual졖 Cohabitation졖 Concubinage졖 Courtesan졖 Domestic partnership졖 Family졖 Friendship졖 Girlfriend졖 Husband졖 Kinship졖 Marriage졖 Mistress (lover)졖 Monogamy졖 Non-monogamy졖 Pederasty졖 Polyamory졖 Polyfidelity졖 Polygamy졖 Romantic friendship졖 Same-sex relationship졖 Significant other졖 Soulmate졖 Widowhood졖 Wife
Major relationship events
Courtship졖 Bonding졖 Divorce졖 Relationship breakup졖 Romance졖 Separation졖 Wedding
Feelings and emotions
Affinity졖 Attachment졖 Compersion졖 Infatuation졖 Intimacy졖 Jealousy졖 Limerence졖 Love졖 Passion졖 Platonic love졖 Polyamory졖 Psychology of sexual monogamy
Human practices
Bride price (Dower 쨌 Dowry)졖 Hypergamy졖 Relationship abuse (Child abuse졖 Elder abuse졖 Spousal abuse)졖 Sexuality졖 Teen dating violence
Compersion is a term used by practitioners of polyamory to describe the experience of taking pleasure that one's partner is experiencing pleasure, even if the source of their pleasure is other than yourself. The feeling may or may not be sexual. Quite often it's not. It should not be confused with cuckolding practices or voyeurism. It was originally coined by the Kerista Commune in San Francisco[1] (or possibly by the ZEGG community in Germany)[2] which practiced polyfidelity, and has since been adopted throughout the culture of polyamory.
The definition of compersion is often mistakenly referred to as "the opposite of jealousy",[2] with the term jealousy explicitly used to describe one's pain at a lover's positive experience with a perceived rival. However, various forms of jealousy, including the explicit fear of losing a relationship, can still coexist with feelings of compersion. This paradox suggests that compersion is more complex than simply being an opposite of jealousy, and it is likely a mental state of its own.
Investigative reporter and sex educator Eric Francis clarified the definition further at his Planet Waves website, stating that an individual could look for their own compersion within the jealousy itself: "Right inside the jealous episode is a fiery core of erotic passion. It may surprise you how good it feels, and if you get there, you can be sure you're stepping right into compersion."


The adjective frubbly and the noun frubbles are sometimes used, in the poly community in the United Kingdom and the United States, to describe the feeling of compersion.[3] These terms are more suited to cheerful, light-hearted conversation, and they are more grammatically versatile, for example: "I'm feeling all frubbly" and "Their relationship fills me with frubbles".



