List of compositions by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was prolific and wrote in many genres. Perhaps his best-admired work is in opera, the piano concerto and sonata, the symphony, and in the string quartet and string quintet. Mozart also wrote much work for solo piano, other forms of chamber music, masses and other religious music, and endless dances, divertimentos, and other forms of light entertainment.


Mozart's symphonic production covers a 24 year interval, from 1764 to 1788. According to most recent investigations, Mozart wrote not just the 41 symphonies reported in traditional editions, but up to 68 complete works of this type. However, by convention, the original numbering has been retained, and so his last symphony is still known as "No. 41". Some of the symphonies (K. 297, 385, 550) were revised by the author after their first versions.

These are the numbered symphonies from Mozart's early childhood.
There are also several "unnumbered" symphonies from this time period.

These symphonies are sometimes subcategorized as "Early" (1771–1773) and "Late" (1773–1775), and sometimes subcategorized as "Germanic" (with minuet) or "Italian" (without minuet). None of these were printed during Mozart's lifetime.
Although not counted as "symphonies" the three Divertimenti K. 136–138, in 3-movement Italian overture style, are sometimes indicated as "Salzburg Symphonies" too.

The three final symphonies (Nos. 39–41) were completed in about three months in 1788. It is quite likely that he hoped to publish these three works together as a single opus, although actually they remained unpublished until after his death. One or two of them might have been played in public in Leipzig in 1789.


Mozart's production for piano and orchestra are numbered from 1 to 27. The first four numbered concertos are early works (Piano Concertos Nos 1-4 (Mozart)). The movements of these concertos are arrangements of keyboard sonatas by various contemporary composers (Raupach, Honauer, Schobert, Eckart, C.P.E. Bach). Concertos 7 and 10 are compositions for three and two pianos respectively. The remaining twenty-one are original compositions for solo piano and orchestra. Among them, fifteen were written in the years from 1782 to 1786, while in the last five years Mozart wrote just two more piano concertos.

Mozart's five violin concertos were written in Salzburg around 1775. They are notable for the beauty of their melodies and the skillful use of the expressive and technical characteristics of the instrument, though Mozart probably never went through all the violin possibilities like others (e.g. Beethoven and Brahms) did after him. (Alfred Einstein notes that the violin concerto–like sections in the serenades are more virtuosic than in the works titled Violin Concertos.)
In addition, there are two works that are spuriously attributed to Mozart.
Mozart also penned an adagio and two stand-alone rondos for violin and orchestra.

Arguably the most widely played concertos for horn, the four Horn Concertos are a major part of most professional horn players' repertoire. They were written for Mozart's lifelong friend Joseph Leutgeb. The concertos (especially the fourth) were written as virtuoso vehicles that allow the soloist to show a variety of abilities on the valveless horns of Mozart's day.
The Horn Concertos are characterized by an elegant and humorous dialogue between the soloist and the orchestra. Many of the autographs contain jokes aimed at the dedicatee.



Mozart's earliest composition attempts begin with piano sonatas and other piano pieces, as this is the instrument on which his musical education took place. Almost everything that he wrote for piano was intended to be played by himself (or by his sister, also a proficient piano player). Examples of his earliest works are those found in Nannerl's Music Book. Between 1782 and 1786 he wrote 20 works for piano solo (including sonatas, variations, fantasias, suites, fugues, rondo) and works for piano four hands and two pianos.
