Ann Coulter
Ann Hart Coulter, J.D. (born December 8, 1961) is an American social and political commentator, author, and syndicated columnist. She frequently appears on television, radio, and as a speaker at public and private events. Well known for her conservative political opinions and the controversial ways in which she defends them, Coulter has described herself as a polemicist who likes to "stir up the pot" and, unlike "broadcasters," does not "pretend to be impartial or balanced."[1]


Ann Hart Coulter was born to John Vincent Coulter (Albany, New York, May 5, 1926–New Canaan, Connecticut, January 4, 2008) and wife Nell Husbands Martin (Paducah, Kentucky, February 23, 1928–)(married at Stuyvesant, New York, September 30, 1953).[2] After her birth in New York City, New York, the family moved to New Canaan, Connecticut, where Coulter and her two older brothers, James and John, were raised.[3]
As an undergraduate at Cornell University, Coulter helped found The Cornell Review,[4] and was a member of the Delta Gamma national women's fraternity.[5] She graduated cum laude from Cornell in 1984, and received her law degree from the University of Michigan Law School, where she achieved membership in the Order of the Coif and was an editor of the Michigan Law Review.[6] At Michigan, Coulter founded a local chapter of the Federalist Society and was trained at the National Journalism Center.[7]
After law school, Coulter served as a law clerk, in Kansas City, for Pasco Bowman II of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.[8] After a short time working in New York City in private practice, where she specialized in corporate law, Coulter left to work for the United States Senate Judiciary Committee after the Republican Party took control of Congress in 1994. She handled crime and immigration issues for Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan and helped craft legislation designed to expedite the deportation of aliens convicted of felonies.[9] She later became a litigator with the Center for Individual Rights.[10]

Coulter has been engaged several times, but never married.[11] She has dated Spin founder and publisher Bob Guccione, Jr.,[12] and conservative writer Dinesh D'Souza.[13] In October 2007, she began dating Andrew Stein, the former president of the New York City Council, a liberal Democrat. When asked about the relationship, Stein told the paper, "She's attacked a lot of my friends, but what can I say, opposites attract!"[14] On January 7, 2008, however, Stein told the New York Post that the relationship was over, citing irreconcilable differences.[15]
Coulter owns both a condominium in Manhattan and a house, bought in 2005, in Palm Beach, Florida. Although she says that usually she lives in New York, she votes in Palm Beach and is not registered to do so in New York.[16] She is a fan of the Grateful Dead,[17][18] and some of her favorite books include The Bible, Wuthering Heights, Anna Karenina, true crime stories about serial killers and anything by Dave Barry.[19]

Known for her polemical style,[20] Coulter has been described by The Observer as, "the Republican Michael Moore" and "Rush Limbaugh in a miniskirt."[21]

Coulter made her first national media appearance in 1996 after she was hired by the then-fledgling network MSNBC as a legal correspondent. Time said this about her tenure there:
The network dismissed her at least twice: first in February 1997, after she insulted the late Pamela Harriman, the U.S. Ambassador to France, even as the network was covering her somber memorial service.... Even so, the network missed Coulter's jousting and quickly rehired her.
Eight months later, Coulter's relationship with MSNBC ended permanently after she tangled with a disabled Vietnam veteran on the air. Robert Muller, co-founder of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, asserted that "in 90% of the cases that U.S. soldiers got blown up [in Vietnam]—Ann, are you listening—they were our own mines." (Muller was misquoting a 1969 Pentagon report that found that 90% of the components used in enemy mines came from U.S. duds and refuse.) Coulter, who found Muller's statement laughable, averted her eyes and responded sarcastically: "No wonder you guys lost." It became an infamous—and oft-misreported—Coulter moment. The Washington Post and others turned the line into a more personal attack: "People like you caused us to lose that war."
But her troubles with MSNBC only freed her to appear on CNN and Fox News Channel, whose producers were often calling. [22]
Howard Kurtz of the Washington Post made a point to respond to the Time article to explain that his widely quoted reporting of Coulter's reply to the veteran in an article he wrote had its origin in Coulter's own later recollection of the incident. Describing his previous story, Kurtz added, "I did note that, according to Coulter, the vet was appearing by satellite, and she didn't know he was disabled."[23]
Coulter has made frequent guest appearances on many television and radio talk shows, including The Today Show, Hannity and Colmes, The O'Reilly Factor, American Morning, Crossfire, Real Time with Bill Maher, Politically Incorrect, The Fifth Estate, The Sean Hannity Show, The Rush Limbaugh Show, and Mike Gallagher.
In 2005, Coulter appeared as one of a three-person judging panel in The Greatest American, a four-part interactive television program for the Discovery Channel hosted by Matt Lauer.[24] Starting with 100 nominees, each week interactive viewer voting eliminated candidates. She voted for George Washington, over Ronald Reagan and Martin Luther King, Jr., for the title of Greatest American ever.

In 2004, Coulter appeared in three films. The first was Feeding the Beast, a made-for-television documentary on the "24-Hour News Revolution".[25] The other two films were FahrenHYPE 9/11, a direct to video documentary intended to rebut Michael Moore's Fahrenheit 911, and Is It True What They Say About Ann?, a documentary on Coulter containing clips of interviews and speeches.[26]
In 2006, Coulter refused permission to include a scene featuring herself and Al Franken in a debate in Connecticut in Franken's film, Al Franken: God Spoke.[27]

Coulter is the author of seven books, all of which have appeared on New York Times Best Seller list.
Coulter's first book, High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton (ISBN 0-89526-113-8), was published by Regnery Publishing in 1998. The book details Coulter's case for the impeachment of President Bill Clinton.
Coulter's second book, Slander: Liberal Lies About the American Right (ISBN 1-4000-4661-0), published by Crown Forum in 2002, remained number one on The New York Times Best Seller list for seven weeks. In Slander, Coulter argues that President George W. Bush was given unfair negative media coverage.
In Coulter's third book, Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism (ISBN 1-4000-5030-8), also published by Crown Forum, Coulter reexamines the 60-year history of the Cold War — including the career of Senator Joseph McCarthy, the Whittaker Chambers–Alger Hiss affair, and Ronald Reagan’s challenge to Mikhail Gorbachev to "tear down this wall" — and argues that liberals were wrong in their Cold War political analyses and policy decisions, and that McCarthy was correct about Soviet agents working for the U.S. government. She also argues that the correct identification of Annie Lee Moss, among others, as Communists was misreported by that liberal media. Treason was published in 2003, and spent 13 weeks on the Best Seller list.[28]
Crown Forum published a collection of Coulter's columns in 2004 as her fourth book, How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must): The World According to Ann Coulter (ISBN 1-4000-5418-4).
Coulter's fifth book, published by Crown Forum in 2006, is Godless: The Church of Liberalism (ISBN 1-4000-5420-6). Coulter argues, first, that liberalism rejects the idea of God and reviles people of faith, and second, that it bears all the attributes of a religion itself. Godless debuted at number one on The New York Times Best Seller list.[29]
Coulter published If Democrats Had Any Brains, They'd Be Republicans, in October 2007.[30][31]
Ann Coulter's most recent book was released January 6, 2009. It is entitled Guilty: Liberal "Victims" and Their Assault on America.[32] [33]

In the late 1990s, Coulter's weekly (biweekly from 1999-2000) syndicated column for Universal Press Syndicate began appearing. Her column is featured on six conservative websites: Human Events Online, WorldNetDaily, Townhall.com, FrontPageMag, Jewish World Review and her own website. Her syndicator says, "Ann's client newspapers stick with her because she has a loyal fan base of conservative readers who look forward to reading her columns in their local newspapers."[34] Her column on her personal website, anncoulter.com, is also permanently linked to by the Drudge Report web page.[35]
In 1999, Coulter worked as a regular columnist for George magazine.[36][12] Coulter also wrote exclusive weekly columns between 1998 and 2003 and with occasional columns thereafter for the conservative magazine Human Events. In her columns for the magazine, she discusses judicial rulings, Constitutional issues, and legal matters affecting Congress and the executive branch.
Overall, Coulter's columns are highly critical of liberals and Democrats. In one, she wrote:
This year's Democratic plan for the future is another inane sound bite designed to trick American voters into trusting them with national security. To wit, they're claiming there is no connection between the war on terror and the war in Iraq, and while they're all for the war against terror — absolutely in favor of that war — they are adamantly opposed to the Iraq war. You know, the war where the U.S. military is killing thousands upon thousands of terrorists (described in the media as "Iraqi civilians", even if they are from Jordan, like the now-dead leader of al-Qaida in Iraq, Abu Musab al-Zarqawi). That war.[37]

In 2001, as a contributing editor and syndicated columnist for National Review Online (NRO), Coulter was asked by editors to make changes to a piece written after the September 11 attacks. On the national television show Politically Incorrect, Coulter accused NRO of censorship and said that she was paid $5 per article. NRO dropped her column and terminated her editorship. Jonah Goldberg, editor-at-large of NRO, said, "We did not 'fire' Ann for what she wrote... we ended the relationship because she behaved with a total lack of professionalism, friendship, and loyalty [concerning the editing disagreement]."[38]
Coulter contracted with USA Today to cover the 2004 Democratic National Convention. She wrote one article that began, "Here at the Spawn of Satan convention in Boston..." and referred to some unspecified female attendees as "corn-fed, no make-up, natural fiber, no-bra needing, sandal-wearing, hirsute, somewhat fragrant hippie chick pie wagons." The newspaper declined to print the article citing an editing dispute over "basic weaknesses in clarity and readability that we found unacceptable." An explanatory article by the paper went on to say "Coulter told the online edition of Editor & Publisher magazine that 'USA Today doesn't like my "tone", humor, sarcasm, etc., which raises the intriguing question of why they hired me to write for them.'" USA Today replaced Coulter with Jonah Goldberg, and Coulter published it instead on her website.[39][40][41]
In August 2005, the Arizona Daily Star dropped Coulter's syndicated column citing reader complaints that "Many readers find her shrill, bombastic and mean-spirited. And those are the words used by readers who identified themselves as conservatives."[42]
In July 2006, some newspapers replaced Coulter's column with those of other conservative columnists[43] following the publication of her fourth book, Godless: The Church of Liberalism. After the Augusta Chronicle dropped her column, newspaper editor Michael Ryan explained that "it came to the point where she was the issue rather than what she was writing about."[44] Ryan also stated that "Pulling Ann Coulter's column hurts; she's one of the clearest thinkers around."

Coulter is a frequent public speaker, particularly on college campuses, receiving both praise and protest. During an appearance at the University of Arizona, a pie was thrown at her.[45][46][47]Coulter has, on occasion, responded with insulting remarks towards hecklers and protestors who attend her speeches.[48][49][50][11]

Coulter says that she holds Christian beliefs, but has not declared her membership in any particular denomination; she has mentioned that her father was Catholic while her mother was not.[51] At one public lecture she said: "I don't care about anything else: Christ died for my sins and nothing else matters."[52] In a 2004 column,[53] she summarized her view of Christianity: "Jesus' distinctive message was: People are sinful and need to be redeemed, and this is your lucky day because I'm here to redeem you even though you don't deserve it, and I have to get the crap kicked out of me to do it." She then mocked "the message of Jesus ... according to liberals," summarising it as "...something along the lines of 'be nice to people'," which, in turn, she said "is, in fact, one of the incidental tenets of Christianity".
Confronting some critics' views that her content and style of writing is un-Christian,[54][55] Coulter has stated that "I'm a Christian first and a mean-spirited, bigoted conservative second, and don't you ever forget it."[56] She has also said: "... Christianity fuels everything I write. Being a Christian means that I am called upon to do battle against lies, injustice, cruelty, hypocrisy — you know, all the virtues in the church of liberalism."[57] In Godless: The Church of Liberalism, as well as in personal appearances, Coulter characterized the theory of evolution as "bogus science",
