iPod Nano
The iPod Nano (marketed lowercase as iPod nano) is a portable media player designed and marketed by Apple Inc. It is the midrange model in Apple's iPod family. The first generation was introduced in 2005.[1] It uses flash memory, like the iPod Shuffle, but with a 2-inch (diagonal) QVGA display and the "click wheel" found on the iPod Classic. The iPod nano has gone through four models, or generations, since its introduction.

Instead of the hard disk which is used in the iPod Classic, the Nano uses flash memory.
The first, second, third, and fourth generation iPod Nano include some pre-installed games: Brick, Music Quiz, Parachute, Maze (an accelerometer game), Vortex and Solitaire. The third generation iPod Nano included pre-installed games, but can also run games which Apple makes available for purchase in the iTunes Store. [2]
Unlike the preceding iPod Mini, its battery is soldered to the printed circuit board of the device, making it harder to replace manually,[3] although replacement batteries are readily available.[citation needed] The flash memory chips used are surface mount devices, making any attempt to upgrade the Nano's storage capacity impractical. It has 24 hours of power when fully charged.
The lack of the remote connector found on the top of many previous models means that a number of third-party accessories do not work with the iPod Nano; newer versions using the dock connector have been made. The first and third generation iPod Nano did not support voice recording; the second and fourth generation Nanos function with third-party recording attachments.[4] It did not function with either Apple's iPod Camera Connector or other camera connectors from third-party manufacturers.[5]


Advertising emphasized the iPod Nano's small size: it is 1.6말n (40맔m) width, 3.5말n (90맔m) length, 0.27말n (6.9맔m) thick and weighs 1.5맖unces (42많rams). Its stated battery life is up to 14맏ours. The screen is 176x132맗ixels, 1.5말n (38맔m) diagonal, and can display 65,536 colors (16-bit color).[1]

Development work on the design of the iPod Nano started only nine months before its launch date.[8] The Nano was launched in two colors (black and white) with two available sizes: 2GB (roughly 500 songs) for US$199 and 4GB (1000 songs) for US$249.[1] On February 7, 2006, Apple updated the lineup with the 1GB model (240 songs) sold at US$149.[9] Apple also released some accessories, including armbands and silicone "tubes" designed to bring color to the Nano and protect it from scratches, as well as a combination lanyard-earphone accessory that hangs around the neck, and avoids the problem of tangling earphone cords.


The iPod Nano uses general-purpose integrated circuits (IC) instead of smaller, low-cost custom-developed chips, possibly to reduce time-to-market. This design, however, increases the number of electronic components and increases the cost. Japanese engineers estimated the component cost of the 2GB Nano as between JP춴22,000 and JP춴27,000 (US$185-US$227), which was high compared to the retail price of JP춴21,800 (US$183) at the time. The cost of 2GB NAND flash memory was about JP춴14,000 (US$118). Apple also opted for the 0603 (1.6x0.8맔m) surface mount technology which was just beginning widespread use in mobile phones in 2005.[10] The iPod Nano uses a PortalPlayer PP5021C "system on a chip" with dual embedded 80 MHz ARM 7TDMI processors.[11]

The initial consumer response to the iPod Nano was overwhelmingly positive and sales were heavy.[13] The Nano sold its first million units in only 17 days, helping Apple to a record billion-dollar profit in 2005.[14]
Apple's release of the iPod Nano as a replacement for the iPod Mini was viewed by many as a risky move.[15] Steve Jobs has argued that the iPod Nano was a necessary risk since competitors were beginning to catch up to the iPod Mini in terms of design and features, and believed the iPod Nano would prove to be even more popular and successful than the iPod Mini.
Within days of the Nano's release, some users reported damage to the Nano, suggesting that the LCD screen had become so scratched that it was unreadable, even when the backlight was on. Many have reported fine scratches on their Nano caused by microfiber cloths. Other owners reported that their Nano's screen cracked with no provocation.[16] On September 27, 2005, Apple confirmed a small percentage ("less than 1/10 of 1 percent") of iPod Nanos shipped with a faulty screen and agreed to replace any Nanos with cracked screens, but denied the iPod Nano was more susceptible to scratching than prior iPods.[17] Apple started shipping iPod Nanos with a protective sleeve to protect them from scratches. In October 2005, a class action lawsuit was filed against Apple, with the plaintiffs seeking reimbursement for the device, legal fees, and "unlawful or illegal profits" from sales of the iPod Nano. Lawyers for the plaintiffs claim that the devices "scratch excessively during normal usage, rendering the screen on the Nanos unreadable, and violating state consumer protection statutes".[18] Similar lawsuits were later filed in Mexico and the United Kingdom.[19] Apple is currently in the middle of settling a court case over the scratched iPod Nano screens, it has been suggested for Apple to set aside $22 million to refund users. A Judge will need to sign off the terms by the 28th April 2009.[20] Some commentators such as BusinessWeek's Arik Hesseldahl have criticized the lawsuits. Hesseldahl dismissed them as "stupid" and suggested that they benefitted "no one but the trial lawyers," but also suggested that Apple could have avoided litigation by offering "full refunds on unwanted Nanos" instead of charging a re-stocking fee and lengthening the return period from 14 days (when purchased through Apple retail or online) to 30 or 60 days.[21]

In Australia, an iPod Nano caught fire while being charged on a PC.[22][23] Since the limited warranty was over, the consumer was not able to get a replacement right away.
Another iPod incident happened in the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport while a man was working in the airport.[24] His iPod Nano set his pants (trousers) on fire. Apple Inc. refused to release a statement regarding this issue.
In addition, an iPod Nano sparked in Japan in January while it was recharging.[25] Although no one was injured during the incident, Apple Inc. is currently investigating it.[26] It was reported on 19 August 2008 that 17 incidents of abnormal overheating with 1st-generation iPod Nano units while recharging had been reported in Japan, including cases in which tatami mats had been charred. [27]

On September 12, 2006, Apple updated the Nano line. The second-generation Nano features scratch-resistant, anodized aluminum casing like the earlier Mini's design; the multiple color choices (silver, green, pink, blue, and black) mirror that of the Mini as well. However, unlike the second-generation Mini, the button labels do not match the color of the Nano. Instead, they are gray, like the first-generation Mini, except for the black iPod which has a black click wheel. The second-generation Nano features "a brighter, more vibrant display",[28] a battery life upgrade (from 14 to 24 hours), and doubled storage sizes with the new 2, 4, and 8GB models (compared to the previous 1, 2, and 4GB models). The second generation iPod Nanos also support gapless playback of audio files, a new search option, and a 40% brighter screen. The 2GB model was available in silver only. The 4GB was initially available in green, blue, silver, or pink. The 8GB model was initially only available in black but Product Red was later added. Apple claims that the second generation iPod Nano's packaging is "32% lighter and uses 52% less volume than the first generation",[29] thereby reducing environmental impact and shipping cost at the same time.
On October 13, 2006, Apple announced a special edition iPod Nano Product Red, with a red exterior and 4GB of storage. For each red iPod Nano sold in the United States, Apple donates US$10 to the Product Red initiative, while retaining the regular price of US$199.[30] On November 3, 2006, Apple introduced a red 8GB model, due to "outstanding customer demand", while also retaining the US$249 price point of the black model with an equally large storage capacity.[31]


Apple updated the Nano again on September 5, 2007. The third-generation Nano features a 2-inch (51맔m) QVGA (320칑240) screen and a shorter, wider, heavier design, with new colors. New features include browsing via Cover Flow, a new user interface, video playback, Users must repurchase games bought before a month prior to the debut of the new iPod as they are not supported. The Nano was announced in a 4GB version at US$149 (UK춲99.99) coming only in silver, and an 8GB version at US$199 (UK춲129.99) coming in silver, turquoise, mint green, black and Product Red. The battery lasts for approx. 24 hours on audio playback and approx. 5 hours on video playback. On January 22, 2008, Apple released a pink version of the 8GB iPod Nano.
Combining elements from previous generations of the iPod Nano, the third-generation Nano has an aluminum front plate and a stainless steel back plate. The Nano also sports a new Minimalistic hold switch, similar to the iPod Shuffle's power switch, which has been moved to the bottom of the player. The 2-inch (51맔m) screen has the smallest dot pitch of any Apple product, having the same pixel count as the 2.5-inch (64맔m) display of the iPod Classic.
On October 6, 2007, Apple released a firmware update (1.0.2) via iTunes that is said to improve Cover Flow and yield faster menu navigation.[32] The update was also released for the iPod Classic. On November 28, 2007, Apple released another firmware update (1.0.3) via iTunes, which included unspecified bugfixes. January 15, 2008 saw the release of version 1.1, which added support for iTunes movie rentals, music song lyrics support and included more unspecified bugfixes. In May 2008, Apple released update version 1.1.2. In July 2008, Apple released update 1.1.3.

At the Apple Let's Rock Event on September 9, 2008, the iPod Nano 4th Generation was officially announced.[33] It returns to the narrow form factor of the 1st and 2nd Generation model, while retaining and rotating the 2-inch (51 mm) screen from the 3G model. It is also thinner than the 1G, 2G and 3G, measuring 90.7 mm (3.6 inches) tall by 38.7 mm (1.5 inches) wide by 6.2 mm (0.24 inch) thick, and weighing 36.8 grams (1.3 ounces). It has a curved aluminum shell and glass screen (the glass screen being held in place with nothing but the shell).
The six previous colors (silver, black, mint, turquoise, berry red, and rose pink) have been replaced by silver, black, purple, light blue, green, yellow, orange, red, and pink. Apple markets the new colors as "nano-chromatic". Also added is an accelerometer which allows the Nano to shuffle songs by shaking it, the option between portrait and landscape display modes by tilting the iPod left or right, and access to Cover Flow when tilted sideways. Videos, however, can only be played in landscape mode. The user interface has also been refreshed, adding a more stylized look in keeping with the new hardware design. It includes a new voice recording feature which starts automatically when an Apple compatible microphone is plugged in. It also includes the new "Genius" feature, introduced by Apple the same day. The Genius feature automatically creates playlists based on a selected song using an algorithm built by Apple.
It is additionally touted as "the most environmentally friendly iPod Apple has ever made", containing arsenic-free glass and a BFR-, mercury-, and PVC-free design. It is also claimed to be highly recyclable. The iPod Nano 4G is shipped in cases similar to the 2G ones with the clear view in the front, and is marketed in two models: 8GB and 16GB. Limited quantities of an unannounced 4 GB model have surfaced in various markets[7] Also, the iPod Quiz game was dropped and replaced with a Maze game which makes use of the iPod's accelerometer similarly to such games on the iPhone and iPod touch.

The fourth generation drops support for charging via FireWire. "This change means that any dock accessories that use the dock connector's FireWire pins to send power--many older speakers and car chargers, for example--will not charge the 4G iPod nano." [34]








