The Departed
The Departed is a 2006 American crime-thriller film remake of the 2002 Hong Kong film Infernal Affairs. The Departed was directed by Martin Scorsese, written by William Monahan and stars Leonardo DiCaprio, Matt Damon, Jack Nicholson, Martin Sheen, Alec Baldwin, Mark Wahlberg and Ray Winstone. The film won four Academy Awards at the 79th Academy Awards, including the Best Picture, and a Best Director win for Scorsese.
This film takes place in Boston, Massachusetts, where notorious Irish Mob boss Francis "Frank" Costello (Nicholson) plants Colin Sullivan (Damon) as an informant within the Massachusetts State Police. Simultaneously, the police assign undercover cop Billy Costigan, Jr. (DiCaprio) to infiltrate Costello's crew. When both sides of the law realize the situation, each man attempts to discover the other's true identity before being found out.

The film begins in South Boston and Charlestown, where Irish mob boss Francis "Frank" Costello (Nicholson) beguiles a young neighborhood boy named Colin Sullivan (Conor Donovan), who enters into Costello's criminal underground at a young age. Years later, Colin (now played by Damon) completes his training for the Massachusetts State Police, graduating as a state trooper. Colin, who quickly distinguishes himself, is assigned to the Special Investigations Unit ("SIU") of the State Police by SIU's Captain Oliver Queenan (Sheen) and Staff Sergeant Sean Dignam (Wahlberg). However, Colin's express intent is to serve as a double agent for Costello within the police force.
In another State Police training program is William "Billy" Costigan Jr. (DiCaprio). After his graduation, Queenan and Dignam interview Billy, convinced that his family ties with the Boston underworld make Billy unsuitable for anything other than undercover work. Billy agrees to work for Queenan and Dignam's undercover division of SIU and become a mole in Costello's crime family. To make his new identity believable, SIU creates a false assault conviction for Billy; he serves a jail sentence, is placed on probation, and attends mandatory psychiatry sessions. Billy's police academy record and file are concealed from the department, leaving only Queenan and Dignam with any knowledge of his true identity.
Both Colin and Billy are able to infiltrate their chosen organizations, with Billy being initiated in with Costello after a particularly brutal torture by Costello's right hand man, Mr. French (Ray Winstone). However, the intelligence they provide soon alerts both SIU and Costello that their groups contain double agents. To catch his group's "rat," Costello requires his enforcers to submit their biographical data to him, and transfers the data to Colin in SIU for a records check. The information, including social security numbers, is collected on paper and placed in a distinctive envelope. Billy follows this envelope, predicting it will lead him to SIU's mole, and observes the handover between Costello and his mole (Colin) in a porno house. Because of where he's sitting, though, Billy, cannot directly identify Costello's mole, and is forced to follow him out into the streets into the Chinatown district, where Colin becomes alerted to Billy's presence. Despite a protracted game of hide and seek leading to the stabbing of a bystander, neither man is able to positively identify the other.
SIU initiates its own measures to capture the moles in its division. Organized Crime's Captain Ellerby (Alec Baldwin), beguiled by Colin's "immaculate record," assigns him to investigate SIU troopers and locate the moles. Colin uses his new authority to instead target Costello's rat. He orders SIU troopers to follow Captain Queenan, which eventually leads them to a clandestine meeting. Colin, realizing Queenan must be meeting with Costello's rat, calls in mob enforcers, who arrive before Billy and Queenan can escape. Queenan orders Billy to flee, and stays behind to confront Costello's crew alone, leading to his death when he is beaten and thrown out of an upper story of the building.
In the aftermath of Queenan's death, Colin orders Dignam to "unlock" the files on undercovers for him; Dignam, knowing that this will expose Billy's identity, refuses violently. Ellerby steps in and places Dignam on a two week probation with pay, but Dignam chooses to resign in protest instead. Colin then opens the box of evidence retrieved from Queenan's murder scene, and finds a scribble in Queenan's personal notebook indicating that Costello might himself be an informant for the FBI.
Costello is later tailed by SIU to a Sheffield warehouse where he is to acquire packages of cocaine for distribution. Colin, disturbed by the possibility of Costello's informant identity, stages a police ambush there (using intelligence from SIU's mole, Billy). Costello's entire crew is killed, Mr. French committing suicide after crashing his car, and he himself is badly wounded, but he manages to slip away and attempts to contact Colin for aid. Colin, however, confronts Costello about his status as an informant in the FBI, and demands to know whether Costello has alerted the FBI to Colin's criminal activities. After a heated exchange, Costello attempts to kill Colin with a concealed pistol, but Colin shoots first, killing him after emptying his clip on Costello.
At the station, Colin is showered with praise from his co-workers. Billy, who has come in after Costello's death to regain his identity, meets with Colin for the first time. While Colin leaves the room to retrieve Billy's file, Billy notices the distinctive biographical-information envelope on Colin's desk; he flees the station. Colin, upon realizing he's been discovered, erases Billy's police record and file from the department database.
Colin receives a piece of mail from "WM Costigan," containing audio recordings of Colin and Costello's private conversations, along with Billy's phone number. When called, Billy explains that the tapes, Costello's immunity from prosecution insurance should he be arrested, had been bequeathed to him upon Costello's death, as Billy was the only man Costello truly trusted. Using the tapes as leverage, Billy orders Colin to meet him later that day at the building where Queenan was killed.
On the building's rooftop, Billy confronts and handcuffs Colin, intending to arrest him and reveal his part in Costello's organization. Billy is determined to do so even as Sullivan reveals that he has erased his record. Though Colin's SIU colleague, Trooper Brown (Anthony Anderson), arrives and demands that Billy stand down, Billy convinces Brown (his former classmate in MSP training) that Sullivan must be the mole and backs Colin into an elevator at gunpoint. On the way down, Sullivan boastfully claims that Costigan will never be able to explain his case to Internal Affairs, before his hard exterior melts and he begs Billy to just kill him then and there. Costigan replies bluntly: "I am killing you". When Billy's elevator reaches the ground floor, though, he is gunned down by Trooper Barrigan (James Badge Dale), who then proceeds to shoot and kill Trooper Brown. Barrigan explains that he too was in Costello's employ, and appeals to Colin for solidarity, stating that they "gotta take care of each other" to survive. Instead, Colin executes him and then manipulates the crime scene. Colin's official report states that Barrigan, Costello's lone mole, entered the building and shot both Billy and Brown, whom Colin was unable to save. Colin closes by recommending William Costigan Jr. for the department's Medal of Merit.
After attending Billy's funeral, Colin returns home to find Dignam waiting in his apartment. Dignam, knowing of Colin's treachery and escape from punishment, shoots him through the head with a suppressed pistol, then exits the apartment. The film ends with a lone rat crawling on the apartment's balcony railing, which frames the gold dome of the Massachusetts State House in the background.


Film critic Stanley Kauffman describes a major theme of The Departed as one of the oldest in drama—the concept of identity—and how it "affects one's actions, emotions, self-assurance, and even dreams."[1]
The father-son relationship is a motif throughout the film. Costello acts as a father figure to both Colin and Billy while Queenan acts as Costello's foil in the role of father-figure presenting both sides of the Irish-American father archetype.[2] Colin also refers to Costello as 'Dad' whenever he calls him to inform him of police activities.
In Rolling Stone magazine, Scorsese linked the zero-sum feeling of the end of his movie to real-world feelings toward terrorism and the war on terrorism.[citation needed]


There were two albums released for The Departed, one presenting the original score composed for the movie by Howard Shore, and the other featuring earlier recordings, mostly pop/rock songs, which were used on the soundtrack.

The film opens with "Gimme Shelter" by The Rolling Stones and prominently plays "I'm Shipping Up to Boston" by Dropkick Murphys with lyrics written by Woody Guthrie, which gained the band some popularity. "I'm Shipping Up to Boston" was also used in the CBS News radio brief the morning following the Oscars, with the intro of "I'm Shipping Up to Boston" playing in the background as the awards were announced. Similarly, in an episode of The Simpsons ("The Debarted"), the song was used multiple times. The film also features a live version of "Comfortably Numb" by Roger Waters and Van Morrison from the 1990 Berlin Wall Concert which was originally by Pink Floyd.
Although "Gimme Shelter" is featured in the film, the song does not appear on the album soundtrack. Also heard in the movie but not featured on the soundtrack is "Thief's Theme" by Nas, "Well Well Well" by John Lennon, "Bang Bang" by Joe Cuba and the Act II Sextet from Donizetti's Lucia di Lammermoor.
The movie closes with a cover of Don Gibson's "Sweet Dreams," interpreted by Roy Buchanan.
Track Listing

The film score for The Departed was written by Howard Shore and performed by guitarists Sharon Isbin, G.E. Smith, Larry Saltzman and Marc Ribot. The score was recorded in Shore's own studio in New York State.
Track Listing

Born to an Irish-American family in the Boston neighborhood of Dorchester, Massachusetts, William Monahan (who adapted the screenplay from Infernal Affairs) incorporates the culture and history of Boston heavily into the film. The first images are news clips from the busing riots of the 1970s, over which Costello muses about the city's troubled racial history. Several times, Dignam refers to Billy as "lace curtain," a term used primarily in the Boston metropolitan area by working-class Irish-Americans to disparage upper-middle class Irish-Americans who have "strayed from their roots" in their attempt to better themselves.
The majority of the characters have the non-rhotic Boston accent. The Massachusetts State House is also featured in the film as a symbol of Colin Sullivan's ambition. Boston Red Sox apparel is seen and worn, including the appearance of a now-out-of-print "Reverse The Curse" bumper sticker on the wall at SIU headquarters. Also, in a bar scene the logo of the Harpoon Brewery, which has locations in Boston and Windsor, Vermont, is clearly seen. Costello and his gang drive over the 
