Marshall Rosenberg
Marshall Rosenberg (born October 6, 1934) is an American psychologist and the creator of Nonviolent Communication, a communication process that helps people to exchange the information necessary to resolve conflicts and differences peacefully. He is the founder and Director of Educational Services for the Center for Nonviolent Communication, an international non-profit organization.
Rosenberg was born in Canton, Ohio to Jewish parents, Jean (Weiner) Rosenberg and Fred Rosenberg. His family moved to Detroit, Michigan in 1943, one week prior to the Race Riots of 1943. Marshall has a young brother Calvin, of St. Petersburg, FL, and has three children, Bret, Marla and Rick. He graduated from Cooley High School in Detroit, MI.
In 1961, Rosenberg received his Ph.D. in clinical psychology from the University of Wisconsin-Madison and in 1966 was awarded Diplomate status in clinical psychology from the American Board of Examiners in Professional Psychology. He lives with his wife Valentina in Albuquerque, NM, where the Center for Nonviolent Communication's main office relocated in 2007.

While Rosenberg is most well known for his work with conflict resolution through his system of "life-serving" Nonviolent Communication (NVC), he has also made education reform a major component of his work.
Building on the ideas of Neil Postman, Riane Eisler, Walter Wink, Carl Rogers and others, Rosenberg's contribution to this field involves reforming schools into "Life-Enriching" organizations, with the following characteristics:[1]
The goals of such schools being
This is in contrast with traditional "domination culture" schools which
Rosenberg borrows the term Dominator Culture from Riane Eisler, and builds upon the theory by Walter Wink that we have lived under a domination-culture paradigm for about 8,000 years. Rosenberg says this culture utilizes a specialized language and system of education to allow a small minority to rule over the vast majority of the people, so that the majority is not serving their own life-needs, but serving their masters'.

The Center for Nonviolent Communication emerged out of work he was doing with civil rights activists in the early 1960s. During this period he provided mediation and communication skills training to communities working to desegregate schools and other public institutions.
He worked with educators, managers, mental health and health care providers, lawyers, military officers, prisoners, police and prison officials, clergy, government officials and individual families.
He is a member of the Honorary Board of the International Coalition for the Decade for the Culture of Peace and Non-Violence (2001–2010)
As of 2004:





