Action learning
Action learning is an educational process whereby the participant studies their own actions and experience in order to improve performance. This is done in conjunction with others, in small groups called action learning sets. It is proposed as particularly suitable for adults, as it enables each person to reflect on and review the action they have taken and the learning points arising. This should then guide future action and improve performance.
The method stands in contrast with the traditional teaching methods that focus on the presentation of knowledge and skills. Action learning focuses on research into action taken and knowledge emerges as a result that should lead to the improvement of skills and performance. It has strong links to various philosophies relating to existentialism, the psychology of self-understanding and self-development, and the sociology of group based learning.[citation needed]
Professor Reginald Revans, the originator of action learning, died aged 95 in January, 2003. He had invented and developed this method in the UK in the 1940s, working in the Coal Board and later in hospitals, where he concluded that the conventional instructional methods were largely ineffective.
People had to be aware of their lack of relevant knowledge and be prepared to explore the area of their ignorance with suitable questions and help from other people in similar positions.
From one who had started as an experimental physicist, this was a startling conclusion to come to and it brought him into head-on conflict with academe and schools of management in particular.
Later, Revans relented and this is made clear in the opening chapter of his book (Revans,1980) which describes the formula:
L = P + Q
where L is learning, P is programmed (traditional) knowledge and Q is questioning to create insight.
Q uses four "major" questions:
and 3 "minor" questions:
Although Q is the cornerstone of the method, the more relaxed formulation has enabled action learning to become widely accepted in many countries all over the world. In Revans' book there are examples from the USA, Canada, Latin America, the Middle East, Africa and Asia Pacific.
The contribution of Revans is being seen today through initiatives in leadership development such as those made by Dr Richard Hale and Dr Charles Margerison working with major organisations. They have developed a new approach to education of leaders which is recognised by leading universities interested in work based learning in the UK. This puts the business or personal questions issues before the syllabus, so following Revans' principles 'theory follows the action'. Margerison was heavily influenced by Revans having spent his early career in UK Business Schools where Revans challenged him to 'move to where the action is' and support learning in the workplace. Richard Hale spent his early career in the GEC organisation where Revans' ideas were pursued by Sir Arnold Weinstock. Revans distinguished between puzzles and problems, noting that action learning lent itself to working on real problems (e.g. improving productivity or morale rather than puzzles e.g. constructing a balance sheet.) He also noted from his experience working with Nobel prize winning scientists at University of Cambridge, that there was a distinction between cleverness (i.e. knowledge) and wisdom, which showed in the form of insightful questioning. He showed that much powerful learning comes from people learning 'with and from others', hence many action learning programmes put the 'action learning set' at the heart of the process. Key writers on the subject have been Mike Pedler and Alan Mumford in the UK, Michael Marquardt and Joe Raelin in the USA, Robert Kramer in the public sector, and Maris Martinsons and Robert Davison in the Asia-Pacific region. Revans achieved major honours in Belgium where he linked higher education with industry achieving major results that impacted on national economic recovery.
Revans's theory of action learning was cited by Stuart Crainer as one of the 75 Greatest Management Decisions Ever Made in his book of the same title.



