Colin Wilson
Colin Henry Wilson (born June 26, 1931 in Leicester) is a prolific British writer. He first came to prominence as a philosopher and novelist. Wilson has since written widely on true crime, mysticism, and other topics.

Wilson was born and raised in Leicester, England, U.K.[1] He left school at 16, worked in factories and other jobs, and read in his spare time.[2] At the age of 24, he published The Outsider in 1956. The Outsider examines the role of the social "outsider" in seminal works of various key literary and cultural figures: Albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre, Ernest Hemingway, Hermann Hesse, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, William James, T. E. Lawrence, Vaslav Nijinsky and Vincent Van Gogh), and alienation in their work.[3] The book was successful and helped popularize existentialism in Britain.[4] Critical praise was short-lived and Wilson was soon widely criticized. [5]
Wilson was labeled an Angry Young Man. He contributed to Declaration, an anthology of manifestos by writers associated with the movement, and a chapter of The Outsider was excerpted in a popular paperback sampler, Protest: The Beat Generation and the Angry Young Men.[6][7] Wilson, and his friends Bill Hopkins and Stuart Holroyd, were viewed as a sub-group of the "Angries" that was more concerned with "religious values", than liberal or socialist politics. Critics on the left swiftly labeled them as fascistic; commentator Kenneth Allsop called them "the law givers".[8][9]

After the initial success of his first work, Religion and the Rebel, was universally panned by critics. Time magazine issued an infamous review entitled "Scrambled Egghead", that pilloried the book.[10]
Wilson's works after The Outsider focused on positive aspects of human psychology, such as peak experiences, and the narrowness of consciousness. He admired humanistic psychologist, Abraham Maslow, and corresponded with him. Wilson wrote The War Against Sleep: The Philosophy of Gurdjieff, on the life, work and philosophy of G. I. Gurdjieff, and an accessible introduction to the Greek-Armenian mystic in 1980. He argues throughout his work that the existentialist focus on defeat or nausea is only a partial representation of reality, and that there is no particular reason for accepting it.[citation needed] Wilson views normal, everyday consciousness buffeted by the moment, as 'blinkered', and argues that it should not be accepted as showing us the truth about reality.[citation needed] This blinkering has some evolutionary advantages in that it stops us from being completely immersed in wonder, or in the huge stream of events, and hence unable to act. However, to live properly we need to access more than this everyday consciousness.[citation needed] Wilson believes that our peak experiences of joy and meaningfulness are as real as our experiences of angst, and since we are more fully alive at these moments, they are more real. These experiences can be cultivated through concentration, paying attention, relaxation, and certain types of work. Wilson argues that compulsive criminality is a manifestation of a pathological attempt to gain peak experiences through violence. This leads the criminal to greater extremes of violence, or to a desire to be caught.[citation needed]

Wilson has written non-fiction books on metaphysical and occult themes. In 1971, he published The Occult: A History featuring exegesis on Aleister Crowley, G. I. Gurdjieff, Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, Kabbalah, primitive magic, Franz Anton Mesmer, Gregor Rasputin, Daniel Dunglas Home, and Paracelsus among others. He also wrote a markedly unsympathetic biography of Crowley, Aleister Crowley: The Nature of the Beast, and has written biographies on many other spiritual and psychological visionaries including Gurdjieff, C.G. Jung, Wilhelm Reich, Rudolf Steiner, and P.D. Ouspensky.
Originally, Wilson focused on the cultivation of what he called "Faculty X", which leads to an increased sense of meaning, and abilities such as telepathy or the awareness of other energies. In his later work he suggests the possibility of life after death and the existence of spirits.
He has also written non-fiction books on crime, ranging from encyclopedias to studies of serial killing. He has an ongoing interest in the life and times of Jack the Ripper and sex-crime in general.

Wilson explored his ideas on human potential and consciousness in fiction, mostly detective fiction or science fiction, including several Cthulhu Mythos pieces.
Much of Wilson's fictional output, as in his non-fiction work, from Ritual in the Dark (1960) on, has (as in his nonfiction work) been concerned with the psychology of murder especially that of serial killing. However, he has also written science fiction of a philosophical bent, including the acclaimed Spider-World series.
Having attacked H.P. Lovecraft in The Strength to Dream (1961) as one who was 'sick', had 'rejected reality' and who was 'a bad writer', (but grudgingly praised Lovecraft's story "The Shadow Out of Time" as capable science fiction), Wilson then (on a dare from August Derleth), who was incensed by Wilson's treatment of Lovecraft in The Strength to Dream, wrote The Mind Parasites, to expound his philosophical ideas in the guise of fiction.[citation needed]. Wilson also discusses Lovecraft in Order of Assassins (1972) and in the prefatory Note to The Philosopher's Stone (1969). His short novel The Return of the Lloigor (1969/1974) is also rooted in the Cthulhu Mythos - its central character works on the real book the Voynich Manuscript but discovers it to be a mediaevel Arabic version of the Necronomicon - as is his more recent novel The Tomb of the Old Ones (2002).
Wilson's novel, The Space Vampires, was filmed as Lifeforce, directed by Tobe Hooper,[11] which Wilson has disavowed as untrue to the spirit of his novel.

Note: this bibliography, while extensive, is incomplete. For a complete bibliography see Colin Stanley's Colin Wilson, the first fifty years: an existential bibliography, 1956-2005. Nottingham, UK: Paupers' Press, 2006 (ISBN 0-946650-89-6)
Unpublished works:




