Street art
Street art is any art developed in public spaces — that is, "in the streets" — though the term usually refers to art of an illicit nature, as opposed to government sponsored initiatives. The term can include traditional graffiti artwork, stencil graffiti, sticker art, wheatpasting and street poster art, video projection, art intervention, guerrilla art, flash mobbing and street installations. Typically, the term Street Art or the more specific Post-Graffiti is used to distinguish contemporary public-space artwork from territorial graffiti, vandalism, and corporate art.
The motivations and objectives that drive street artists are as varied as the artists themselves. There is a strong current of activism and subversion in urban art. Street art can be a powerful platform for reaching the public, and frequent themes include adbusting, subvertising and other culture jamming, the abolishment of private property and reclaiming the streets. Other street artists simply see urban space as an untapped format for personal artwork, while others may appreciate the challenges and risks that are associated with installing illicit artwork in public places. However the universal theme in most, if not all street art, is that adapting visual artwork into a format which utilizes public space, allows artists who may otherwise feel disenfranchised, to reach a much broader audience than traditional artwork and galleries normally allow.

Whereas traditional graffiti artists have primarily used free-hand aerosol paints to produce their works,[1] "street art" encompasses many other media and techniques, including;
Traditional graffiti also has increasingly been adopted as a method for advertising; its trajectory has even in some cases led to its artists' working on contract as graphic artists for corporations.[2] Street art is a label often adopted by artists who wish to keep their work unaffiliated, and strongly political. Street artists are those whose work is still largely done without official approval in public areas.
For these reasons street art is sometimes considered "post-graffiti" and sometimes even "neo-graffiti".[3] Street art can be found around the world and street artists often travel to other countries foreign to them so they can spread their designs.

The first Street art artist was Gérfrom Zlotykamien from France[citation needed]. He was born in 1940 in Paris. Street artists such as Banksy, D*Face, Swoon, Twist, 108, Ellis Gallagher, Neck face, Os Gemeos and have earned international attention for their work and in turn migrated the showing of their works to the museum or gallery setting as well as the street. It is also not uncommon for street artists to achieve commercial success Shepard Fairey, Faile, WK Interact[4], Kaws, Ash and Buff Monster doing graphics for other companies or starting their own merchandising lines.

While practically every large city in the world and some of the larger regional towns, host some form of street art or graffiti, there are a few locations that are considered to harbour forerunners of particular mediums or foster a pioneering street art culture in general. Such locations often attract internationally known street artists who travel to these locations to exhibit their works. The following is an incomplete list of a few of the most notable locations;

Various mediums, Melbourne
Ash Astronaut Cosmonaut, Berlin 2007
Poster art, Melbourne
Large stencils, Melbourne
Melbourne
Poster art, Melbourne
Stencil art, Melbourne
Stencil art, Melbourne
Stencil art, Melbourne
Painting, On display as thousands protest the passing of Prop 8 in West Hollywood
East Side Gallery, Berlin
Barack Obama "HOPE" poster in Washington, D.C.
Sprayed stencil and tags, Berlin
Feliz 1984, Berlin
Paste-up, Berlin
Wheatpasting a stenciled version of Michelangelo's The Creation of Adam in France.
Faux air vent attached to building by artist Skewville; it says FAKE
Art by 108 in Zaragoza, Spain.
Charcoal wall drawing by Jorge Rodriguez-Gerada[5] in Barcelona, Spain.
Poster by Artist Hannibal Vector.
Shop shutters by London street artist Eine.
"Cutout" by Artist KarlToon in Leipzig, Germany
Padangbai, Bali, Indonesia.
Mural in Austin, Texas, United States.
James Brown in el Rastro, Madrid.
Serge Gainsbourg in Marseille, France.
Fitzroy, Melbourne, Australia.
Stencil in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Christer Pettersson by Stockholm based street artist Hop Louie.
Frankfurt, Germany.
A stenciled pair of doves by artist Q.
Wheatpaste by Iranian street artist Alone, in Tehran, Iran.
John Fekner, Sunnyside, Queens, New York, United States.
Brick Lane in London, England.
Meterpop installation by Mark Jenkins.
Santa Barbara, California, United States.
Sticker in Cologne, Germany.
Sticker in Hamburg, Germany.
Graffiti by Most misha in Saint petersburg, Russia (2007).
Graffiti by Neva Micheva in Sevilla, Spain (2004).

