Haloperidol
C
℞ Prescription only
Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic. It is in the butyrophenone class of antipsychotic medications and has pharmacological effects similar to the phenothiazines.
Haloperidol is an older antipsychotic used in the treatment of schizophrenia and, more acutely, in the treatment of acute psychotic states and delirium. A long-acting decanoate ester is used as a long acting injection given every 4 weeks to people with schizophrenia or related illnesses who have a poor compliance with medication and suffer frequent relapses of illness. In some countries this can be involuntary under Community Treatment Orders.
Haloperidol is sold under the tradenames Aloperidin, Bioperidolo, Brotopon, Dozic, Duraperidol (Germany), Einalon S, Eukystol, Haldol, Halosten, Keselan, Linton, Peluces, Serenace, Serenase, and Sigaperidol. In medical slang, haloperidol is occasionally called vitamin H.[1]

Haloperidol was discovered by Paul Janssen.[2] It was developed in 1957 by the Belgian company Janssen Pharmaceutica and submitted to first clinical trials in Belgium in the same year.[3] After being rejected by U.S. company Searle due to side effects, it was later marketed in the U.S. by McNeil Laboratories. It was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration on April 12, 1967.

Haloperidol is a neuroleptic and a butyrophenone. Due to its strong central antidopaminergic action, it is classified as a highly potent neuroleptic. It is approximately 50 times more potent than chlorpromazine on a weight basis (50mg chlorpromazine are equivalent to 1mg haloperidol). Haloperidol possesses a strong activity against delusions and hallucinations, most likely due to an effective dopaminergic receptor blockage in the mesocortex and the limbic system of the brain. It blocks the dopaminergic action in the nigrostriatal pathways, which is the probable reason for the high frequency of extrapyramidal-motoric side-effects (dystonias, akathisia, pseudoparkinsonism). It has minor antihistaminic and anticholinergic properties, therefore cardiovascular and anticholinergic side-effects such as hypotension, dry mouth, constipation, etc., are seen quite infrequently, compared with less potent neuroleptics such as chlorpromazine. Haloperidol also has sedative properties and displays a strong action against psychomotor agitation but due to a specific action in the limbic system. It therefore is an effective treatment for mania and states of agitation. Additionally, it can be given as an adjuvant in the therapy of severe chronic pain.[citation needed]
The peripheral antidopaminergic effects of haloperidol account for its strong antiemetic activity. There, it acts at the chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ). Haloperidol is useful to treat severe forms of nausea/emesis such as those resulting from chemotherapy. The peripheral effects lead also to a relaxation of the gastric sphincter muscle and an increased release of the hormone prolactin, with the possible emergence of breast enlargement and secretion of milk (lactation) in both sexes.


The drug is well and rapidly absorbed and has a high bioavailability. Plasma-levels reach their maximum within 20 minutes after injection. The decanoate injectable formulation is for intramuscular administration only and should never be used intravenously.

The bioavailability is 100% and the very rapid onset of action is seen within about ten minutes. The duration of action is 3 to 6 hours. If haloperidol is given as slow IV infusion, the onset of action is retarded, but the duration prolonged compared to IM injection.

Plasma levels of 4 micrograms per liter to 20 (up to 25) micrograms per liter are required for therapeutic action. The determination of plasma levels can be used to calculate dose adjustments and to check compliance, particularly in long-term patients. Plasma levels in excess of the therapeutic range may lead to a higher incidence of side-effects or even pose the risk of haloperidol intoxication.

A comprehensive review of haloperidol has found it to be an effective agent in treatment of symptoms associated with schizophrenia.[4] Haloperidol is also used in the control of the symptoms of:
Some weeks or even months of treatment may be needed before a remission of schizophrenia is evident.
In some clinics the use of atypical neuroleptics (e.g. clozapine, risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone) is generally preferred over haloperidol, because these drugs have an appreciably lower incidence of extrapyramidal side-effects. Each of these drugs, however, has its own spectrum of potentially serious side-effects (e.g. agranulocytosis with clozapine, weight gain with increased risk of diabetes and of stroke). Atypical neuroleptics are also much more expensive and have recently been the subject of increasing controversy regarding their efficacy in comparison to older products and side effects.
Haloperidol was considered indispensable for treating psychiatric emergency situations,[7][8] although the newer atypical drugs have gained greater role in a number of situations as outlined in a series of consensus reviews published between 2001 and 2005.[9][10][11][4] It is enrolled in the World Health Organization List of Essential Medicines.
As is common with typical neuroleptics, haloperidol is by far more active against "positive" psychotic symptoms (delusions, hallucinations etc.) than against "negative" symptoms (social withdrawal, autism etc.). With the exception of the highly effective clozapine, the effectiveness of haloperidol against positive symptoms has not been outperformed by newer antipsychotics.[citation needed]
A multi-year UK study by the Alzheimer's Research Trust suggested that this and other neuroleptic anti-psychotic drugs commonly given to Alzheimer's patients with mild behavioural problems often make their condition worse.[12] The study concluded that[13]

There are multiple reports from Soviet dissidents, including medical staff, on the use of haloperidol for punitive purposes or simply to break the prisoners' will.[14][15][16] Notable dissidents that were administered haloperidol as part of their court ordered treatment were Sergei Kovalev and Leonid Plyushch.[17] The accounts of Plyushch in the West, after he was allowed to leave the Soviet Union in 1976, were instrumental in the triggering Western condemnation of Soviet practices at the World Psychiatric Association's 1977 meeting.[18] The widespread use of haloperidol in the Soviet Union's psychiatric system has a simple explanation: besides chlorpromazine it was the only other psychotropic drug produced in quantity in USSR.[19] Due to the notoriety haloperidol gained in oppressive regimes, Nigel Rodley, a former United Nations special investigator on torture, said: "In the history of oppression, using haloperidol is kind of like detaining people in Abu Ghraib."[20]
Haloperidol has been used for its sedating effects during the deportations of aliens by the United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), although its use has been reduced in 2008. During 2002-2008, federal immigration personnel sedated 384 deportees, an average of 64 a year, and haloperidol was used in 356 of those cases. The reduction in 2008 followed court challenges and a public outcry over the practice. Data collected through Freedom of Information Act requests by The Dallas Morning News show that ICE sedated only 10 people in the 2008 fiscal year, and haloperidol was used in only three cases. The documents show sedation was used disproportionately against Africans, but officials denied allegations that race was a factor. Following the lawsuits, U.S. officials changed the procedure so that it's done on the recommendation of medical personnel and it requires a court order.[21][22]
The use of haloperidol for deportations from the United States was brought to public attention in May 2007 when the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) investigated the drugging of two men, a Christian minister from Indonesia and a Senegalese national.[23][24] In June that year the ACLU sued the Department of Homeland Security, ICE and a division of the U.S. Public Health Service over the drugging of the two men, and sought class-action status.[25] In a report to the U.S. Senate, Julie Myers, assistant secretary of homeland security for the ICE, acknowledged that over a seven-month period between Oct. 1, 2006, and April 30, 2007, 56 deportees were given psychotropic drugs, of which 50 were given haloperidol,[20] but 33 of them had no history of psychological problems, and were given the medicine because of "combative behavior."[26] Neuropharmacologist Philip Seeman pointed out that some deportees were given a total of 30 milligrams of the drug, which Seeman characterized as "really high," especially for people who have never taken the drug before.[20]




The drug is noted for its strong early and late extrapyramidal side-effects.[4] The risk of the facial disfiguring tardive dyskinesia is around 4% per year in younger patients, higher than with most other antipsychotic drugs. In patients over the age of 45, the percentage of those afflicted can be even higher. Other predispositive factors may be female gender, preexisting affective disorder and cerebral dysfunction.
Akathisia manifests itself with anxiety, dysphoria, and an inability to remain motionless.
Other side effects include dry mouth, lethargy, restlessness of akathisia, muscle-stiffness, muscle-cramping, restlessness, tremors, and weight-gain; side effects like these are more likely to occur when the drug is given in high doses and/or during long-term treatment. Depression, severe enough to result in suicide, is quite often seen during long-term treatment. Care should be taken to detect and treat depression early in course. Sometimes the change from haloperidol to a mildly potent neuroleptic (e.g. chlorprothixene or chlorpromazine), together with appropriate antidepressant therapy, does help. Sedative and anticholinergic side-effects occur more frequently in the elderly.
The potentially fatal neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a significant possible side effect. Haloperidol and fluphenazine are the two drugs which cause NMS most often. NMS involves fever and other symptoms. Allergic and toxic side-effects are uncommon. Skin rash and photosensitivity both occur in less than 1% of patients.
Children and adolescents are particularly sensitive to the early and late extrapyramidal side-effects of haloperidol. It is recommended to treat pediatric patients only if clearly needed and if the psychiatric or neurologic disorder is substantial.
QT prolongation with sudden death is rarely seen. Likewise, the development of thromboembolic complications are also rare.
Haloperidol may have a negative impact on vigilance or decrease the ability of the patient to drive or operate a machine, particularly initially.
Haloperidol is completely devoid of any potential psychological dependence. A greater problem is that psychiatric patients prescribed this drug may seek to avoid taking it and consequently risk relapse of their symptoms.
Unpleasant withdrawal symptoms, if haloperidol is stopped abruptly after long-term treatment, are sometimes noted. These are usually agitation, anxiety, insomnia, and nausea. But agitation is also a side effect of this drug because of akathisia. Rebound of psychotic symptoms and mood swing into mania are also seen.
Haloperidol has been shown to dramatically increase dopamine activity, up to 98%, in test subjects after two weeks on a "moderate to high" dose compared to chronic schizophrenics.[28] In another study, a live survey of a patient showed that the person has 90% more dopamine receptors, of the D2 subtype, than before treatment with haloperidol.[29] The long term effect of this is unknown, but the first study concludes that this upregulation is positively associated with severe dyskinesias.(more upregulation, more dyskinesia)
In a placebo-compared study of six macaques receiving haloperidol for up to 27 months, a significant brain volume and weight decreases were detected.[30] In latter studies of the stored samples, the changes were attributed to astrocyte and oligodendrocyte loss,[31] with the neurons spared but positioned more closely compared to the controls.

During long-term treatment of chronic psychiatric disorders, it should be tried - in regular intervals - to reduce the daily dose to the lowest level needed for maintenance of remission. Sometimes, it may be indicated to terminate haloperidol treatment gradually.
Other forms of therapy (psychotherapy, occupational therapy/ergotherapie, social rehabilitation) should be instituted properly.

