Open-Xchange
Open-Xchange Server is a messaging and collaboration solution combining common free software packages, open standards and web services. Open-Xchange Server is available as proprietary software and as a community supported open-source software (GPL 2) package. The company producing Open-Xchange, also named Open-Xchange, is headquartered in Tarrytown, NY, USA, with offices in Germany (Olpe/Nürnberg).

Open-Xchange Express Edition is a web-based email and collaboration solution. Designed for smaller organizations, the Express Edition includes: Ubuntu operating system, open source middleware, collaboration, email, and document sharing software, anti-virus, anti-spam, automatic updates and backup/recovery. The browser-based AJAX interface enables drag and drop, right-click menus, shared calendars, contacts, tasks and documents. Open-Xchange Express Edition supports standard 'rich' clients, such as Microsoft Outlook. Furthermore, Open-Xchange Express Edition provides a WebDAV interface that allows to integrate the document management system called InfoStore into desktop environments or to get read access in web browsers. Outlook users on OX Express Edition can synchronize public, private, and shared folders, accept or decline appointments through Outlook, manage private appointments, tasks, contacts, and “Free/Busy” status.

Open-Xchange Server 5 delivers basic collaborative functions such as e-mail, calendar, contacts, and task management - integrated with advanced groupware features such as document sharing, object linking, rights management, online projects, user forums, and a knowledge base. The Open-Xchange can be integrated in an existing infrastructure via WebDAV, XML (commercial version) interfaces and Java API.
Server 5 supports:

The new version of OX is expected to arrive late 2008, picking up the AJAX interface from OXEE, but supporting the wider feature set of OX5 [1]. As a major change to the OX5 architecture, OX6 will be based on OSGi technology that allows to easily integrate own components into OX6 like modules to integrate with directory servers, additional address book sources, CRM enhancements or even additional modules.

The Hosting Edition enables web-hosting companies to provide Open-Xchange email and groupware as software as a service (SaaS). Therefore, Open-Xchange Hosting Edition provides an architecture that allows to integrate into existing infrastructures and it is designed in a way that a single server can handle several thousand tenants simultaneously (SaaS platform). Each tenant is handled in a context and one context contains all users of this tenant. Furthermore, the OX Hosting Edition features an Ajax user interface with rich-client-like functionality like right-click menus, drag-and-drop capabilities and e.g. the ability to handle tables with thousands of rows without significant loading times.
The Open-Xchange Hosting Edition is currently offered to customers by some of the world largest hosting companies.


