Electroplankton
Electroplankton is an interactive music video game developed by the Japanese interactive media artist Toshio Iwai and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS handheld video game console. It was first released in Japan, and was later released in North America and Europe. This game allows the player to interact with animated plankton and create music through one of ten different plankton themed interfaces. The first-run edition of Electroplankton in Japan came bundled with a set of blue colored ear bud headphones.

The game offers two game modes — Performance and Audience. The Performance mode is considered to be the more significant portion of Electroplankton, allowing the user to interact with the plankton with the use of the stylus, touchscreen, and microphone. Audience mode simply allows the user to put down the system and enjoy a continuous musical show put on by all of the plankton, although the user can interact with the plankton just like in Performance mode. Audience mode is like a demo mode in some other games. This game is noted to be the first DS game to be released, judging from its code, 0001.


The developers considered including a save function, but opted not to because they wanted the players to enjoy the game both extemporarily and viscerally. They felt that if a save function were included, the game would be used more as a tool, where the player had to open several additional menus and windows or have to input file names to save. Another reason was that it would require large volume of flash ROM and would take a long time to save and read the data in order to save the voice files for Volvoice and Rec-Rec.[1]

One of the most common complaints concerning Electroplankton is that the game offers no true way to save the audio created by the player.[1] Absolutely no data is recorded onto the game cartridge at any time, which can be frustrating to the player if he or she manages to compose a particularly elaborate or quality piece. Although this problem can be overcome by connecting an audio recording device, such as a cassette recorder or a personal computer, to the headphone jack of the Nintendo DS, this solution isn't practical for the average player.
Another commonly addressed issue is the fact that Electroplankton does not offer enough options to suit the tastes of many players. The game allows players to create music with only one type of "plankton" at a time, in effect limiting the user to using only a small amount of similar sound effects to create his or her work. This prevents a player from enjoying the same amount of versatility that they might find in a traditional music creation program.

Electroplankton has developed a niche following around the entire globe. The title made its first public appearance at the 2005 Game Developer's Conference, and later, an appearance at the 2005 E3 show, but from then until October 19, 2005, details about the game's release outside of Japan remained somewhat vague. However, on October 19, 2005 Nintendo of America revealed Electroplankton's release date in North America: January 9, 2006, with sales of the game limited to online retailers and the Nintendo World store in New York City, though some retailers may carry the game if they choose to. It was released in Europe on July 7, 2006. Nonetheless, Electroplankton is an import friendly game for most people, mainly because of both its simple menu and its light use of the English language.
This trend for import was heightened in Europe, due to the release date (April 21, 2006) having been chaotically postponed to July 7, 2006. As a consequence, certain European gamers preferred importing the game rather than waiting any longer, or risking deception if the game, already in a bad shape for European release, was not released at all. A release was planned by Nintendo Australia in late 2006 but never eventuated due to, according to NoAus representatives, not enough space in the release schedule. It is assumed dropped altogether.



