Lee-Hom Wang
Lee-Hom Wang is a four-time Golden Melody Award-winning American singer-songwriter and actor who has achieved highly recognized success in Taiwan, Mainland China, Hong Kong, Japan, and throughout Southeast Asia.
He coined the term "chinked-out" music to describe his music, which is heavily influenced by traditional Chinese music. Wang is managed by and records albums with Sony BMG Taiwan. Since 1995, Wang has contributed in over 25 albums, and has sold approximately 15 million records.[3] In addition to his music, Wang also participated in several films, his role in Ang Lee's Lust, Caution gaining the most attention. He is also an environmental activist, and was invited to be one of the first torchbearers for the Beijing 2008 Summer Olympics, carrying the torch in Olympia, Greece on March 24, 2008. He was also invited to perform in the closing ceremonies. His album Change Me was dedicated to raising eco-awareness among Chinese youth. Wang was listed among "The 100 Most Inspiring Asian Americans of All Time" by Goldsea Asian American Daily.[4]

Alexander Lee-Hom Wang was born in Rochester, New York, the second among 3 sons. At the age of six, Wang began to take violin lessons.[2] He attended Jefferson Road Elementary School, Pittsford Middle School, then Pittsford Sutherland High School in the town of Pittsford. Wang graduated from Pittsford Sutherland with high honors.[4]
Wang chose to attend Williams College, where he graduated with honors, double majoring in music and Asian Studies.[4][5] While in college he sang with the Springstreeters, an all-male a cappella group.[5] He continued his studies by attending Berklee College of Music's Professional Music program, with voice as his principal instrument.[2]
In 1995, he was signed to a professional recording contract while visiting his grandparents in Taiwan.[5] Since then, Wang has become one of the new songwriters and musicians revolutionizing the Chinese-language music industry. He is active in all areas of music production, from composing to producing, to music arrangement, to lyric writing, to directing his own music videos.
Although he did not begin learning Mandarin until he was 18, Wang is now fluent in the language (including reading and writing) and has written most of the lyrics for his songs.[5] Wang plays over 10 musical instruments. In his albums and live concerts, Wang can be heard playing piano, drums, guitar, bass, violin, vibraphone, erhu, xun, and more.
A classically trained music background enables Wang to pull from a variety of musical styles and continuously reinvent his own sound that is distinctly Chinese and western at the same time. For example, his 2005 release, Shangri-La drew heavily from R&B, dance pop, and the musics of Chinese ethnic minorities from Tibet, Mongolia, and Yunnan.


In 1995, during a summer trip to Taiwan, Wang's music talent was discovered.[5] His debut album Love Rival Beethoven (情敵貝多芬) was released by Decca Records in the winter of 1995, and received little limelight.
He was asked to leave his college study to pursue a full time singing career in Taiwan. Wang insisted to stay on to finish school, and at the same time, he was able to convince Decca Records to include some of his own writings in his next album. One of his writings became the title song or zhuda (Chinese: 主打; pinyin: zhǔ dǎ) for his second album If You Heard My Song (如果你聽見我的歌). Wang continued his study at Williams College, and released Missing You (好想你) during winter break of 1996 and White Paper (白紙) during summer of 1997. His music breakthrough did not come until a year later when Revolution (公轉自轉) was released after his graduation from Williams.

After graduating from college, Wang was able to devote his full attention to his music career. He signed with Sony BMG Taiwan[6] and released his fifth album, Revolution (公轉自轉) on August 21, 1998. The album became a huge success and won him numerous notable awards including Best Producer of the Year and Best Male Vocalist of the 10th Golden Melody Awards in 1999. He was just 23, making him the youngest person ever to win the award in either of the two categories.[7]
His sixth album Impossible to Miss You (不可能錯過你) was released 10 months later. It was just as successful as his previous album. Although he was nominated again for Best Male Vocalist at the 11th Golden Melody Awards he did not win the award this time. However, the interesting style of music Wang had incorporated in this album had attracted many new fans. Since his release of Revolution, each album Wang produced conveyed different styles of music and sounds, attracted numerous fans from different regions in Southeast Asia.
Although raised in New York, Wang always felt the deep root in his Chinese heritage. He started to incorporate Chinese sounds into his music. In his seventh album, Wang remade a popular Chinese song "Descendants of the Dragon" (traditional Chinese: 龍的傳人; pinyin: lóng de chuán rén) to include in his seventh album Forever's First Day (永遠的第一天). The song raised the pride of the young Chinese generation, soon became a must-sing song in all of his concerts.
His eighth album, The One and Only (唯一) marked the height of his star career. "The One and Only" (Chinese: 唯一; pinyin: wéi	yī) became his signature song. The song has won him over 7 different prestigious awards and was on the Ringback Tone #1 Download Charts for over a year.

Having established himself as one of the most important, influential, and prolific artists in Chinese music, never repeating himself, Wang continued to invent and experiment with new sounds and voices.
His ninth album, Unbelievable marked a milestone in his career. Not only did the album heavily stress mainstream R&B and Hip Hop, it also sold more than 1.3 million copies in Asia and won him Best Producer of the Year again for the 15th Golden Melody Awards in 2004. The lead single of the album, "You're Not Here" (Chinese: 你不在; pinyin: nǐ bù zài) was ranked #1 in several music charts and stayed there for well over 10 weeks. Before the release of Unbelievable, Wang began his first world concert tour titled "Unbelievable". The concert tour received rave reviews from fans and critiques in all regions in Asia.
In his tenth album Shangri-La, released on the last day of 2004, Wang incorporated the often unheard music of Chinese aboriginal music into mainstream hip hop and coined this style "chinked-out". He experimented with the tribal sounds of China, Tibet, and Mongolia, traveled to remote villages, carrying 15 kg of equipment while fighting bouts of altitude and food sickness. Despite the derogatory nature of the term "chink," Wang had wanted to repossess the term and "make it cool."[2] Within ten days of its release, Shangri-La sold past an outstanding 40,000 copies, an excellent start as the first album to be sold in Taiwan of 2005.[8] Within a month, the album sold over 300,000 copies.[9]
Continuing the "chinked-out spirit" by infusing elements of Beijing opera and Kunqu into the songs, Heroes of Earth was released on December 30, 2005. Heroes of Earth was his eleventh album. He collaborated with American rapper Jin and Korean artists Rain and Lim Jeong Hee and again won himself Best Male Vocalist in the 17th Golden Melody Awards in 2006. Heroes of Earth impressively broke the record of selling more than 1 million copies ten days after its release.[10] The album stayed at first place in the G-Music Charts for 6 weeks.[11]. Ultimately, the album stayed in the charts for a total of 23 weeks and became third for the most sold album in Taiwan of 2006.[12]

In the summer of 2007, Wang released his much anticipated 12th album, Change Me. The album was released on Friday, July 13, disregarding the superstition generally attached to Friday the 13th.[13]. Through this album, Leehom promotes the issue of global warming and social awareness. The packaging of the CD uses recycled paper and contains no plastic. Wang believes that little changes in each person can affect the world. The CD also came with a pair of reusable metal chopsticks in a pouch. This is also to promote environmental awareness.
Wang's first promotional single album for the new album, "Falling Leaf Returns to Roots" (traditional Chinese: 落葉歸根; pinyin: luòyè guī gēn) gave its world premiere at Hito Radio on June 20, 2007. The music style is very different from Wang's previous singles. Wang had said that the inspiration behind the song was due to the influence of his portrayal of Kuang Yumin in the film Lust, Caution.[14] The song accompanies melodic violin and piano solos. In addition, Leehom collaborated with Selina Ren, a member of the famous Taiwan girl group S.H.E in "You're a song in my heart" (Chinese: 你是我心内的一首歌; pinyin: nǐ shì wǒ xīn nèi de yī shǒu gē). For this song, Wang sings a few lines in Taiwanese, which was a bit of a challenge for him because of he is not fluent in Taiwanese.[citation needed] Wang learned some Taiwanese in order to help deal with this challenge.[citation needed]
In August 2008, Wang sought US$320,000 in damages for plagiarism by Pritam, an Indian composer. The lead song for the movie Race, composed by Pritam, was allegedly copied from "Deep Within the Bamboo Grove" (traditional Chinese: 竹林深處; pinyin: zhú lín shēnchù).[15]
Wang was announced as conductor of the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra's 2008 annual grand finale for four concerts over three days. He was the first Asian pop musician ever to conduct the orchestra.[16]

In December 2008, Wang released the album Heart Beat (traditional Chinese: 心．跳; pinyin: xīn tìao).[17] This album includes a track with Jane Zhang, a Mandarin artist who is high on the list of collaboration partners for male artists.[citation needed] He demonstrates a new style with the album's main focus going on the electric guitar, as he uses it for the majority of his tracks, and the album in general focuses more on the rock genre than his previous albums.[original research?]

Wang's music ranges greatly from album to album. Although he is classified as an R&B artist, Wang demonstrates competence with many styles of music ranging from traditional Mandopop, Broadway, jazz, rock, R&B, gospel, acoustic, Indipop, hip-hop, to rap. Much of the styles were infused with Chinese flavor.
When he first debuted, he sang old school pop and acoustic R&B ballads. Starting from Revolution (公轉自轉), Wang began to test out R&B pop music, but quickly jumped to a quirky style of dance pop for Impossible to Miss You (不可能錯過你). Starting from Forever's First Day (永遠的第一天), Wang began composing rock songs with heavy electric guitar melodies and less emphasis on dance pop. Nonetheless, Wang still concentrated in light R&B music. The One and Only (唯一) became Wang's only fully produced rock album.
Unbelievable began a new road of music for Wang. Aside from the usual R&B grove, Wang contributed hip hop and rap that was not clearly emphasized in his past albums. "Not Your Average Thug" was a newly composed R&B style with huge American influe
