Monopoly on violence
The monopoly on violence (Gewaltmonopol des Staates) is the definition of the state expounded by Max Weber in Politics as a Vocation, and has been predominant in philosophy of law and political philosophy in the twentieth century.
It defined a single entity, the state, exercising authority or violence over a given territory as territory was also deemed by Weber a characteristic of state. Importantly, such a monopoly, must occur via a process of legitimation, wherein a claim is laid on the state's use of violence as legitimate.

Max Weber said in Politics as a Vocation that a necessary condition of an entity being a state is that it retain such a monopoly. He said, something is "a 'state' if and insofar as its administrative staff successfully upholds a claim on the monopoly of the legitimate use of violence in the enforcement of its order."[1]
According to Weber, the state was to be the source of legitimacy for any use of violence: if the police and the military were its main instruments, this did not mean only public force could be used. Private forces (as in private security) could be used, but its legitimacy derived from the state.
There are several caveats which apply to this basic principle:

Generally speaking, those who support the existence of the state believe that there should be a monopoly on the use of violence, or at least a near monopoly. That is, they believe private violence should be prevented or punished unless it is used solely in immediate self-defense from violence.
Supporters of the state monopoly argue that if a monopoly on the use of violence does not exist, private individuals or groups will, inevitably, arm themselves and use violence against each other and others; thus they claim that anarchy results in more violence than found in even the most violent state. However, the term anarchy is generally missapplied and in this instance what most scholars actually mean is anomie. In support of such reasoning, supporters sometimes point to areas and periods where, on their reading of events, this monopoly did not exist (or, in some sense, where there existed close to a "free market" in violence and security), such as modern Somalia, or Europe during the Dark Ages. They contend that such instances show that the attainment by any government of a monopoly on violence would have improved the lives of the inhabitants.
The philosopher Thomas Hobbes strongly supported a centralized practitioner of force, as he believed that that is the only way an orderly society could be maintained. As Hobbes writes in The Leviathan:

In some western constitutional democracies, the government may not have an absolute monopoly on the use of violence. In the United States, for example, the Second Amendment to the Constitution is frequently read to authorize the existence of armed civilian militias, which could theoretically challenge the government (cf. rebellion) or assist in law enforcement (cf. Posse comitatus). However, in most of the rest of the western world, the government alone is responsible for the maintenance of the civil order.
market anarchys are supportive of the use of legitimate violence (defensive and punitive violence), but they oppose a compulsory monopoly on the use of that violence. They believe the private sector should be allowed to provide its own police, jails, and courts when crimes take place on private property.
They may justify this on moral grounds or on pragmatic ones - that if these security services were supplied in a competitive market, like other services are in a market economy, service would be better and cheaper.
There have been historical records of functional market anarchy in various times, such as medieval Iceland,[3] Ireland,[4] and even what is known as the Wild West.[5] In addition, violence in Somalia actually increased with the establishment of a 'legitimate' government.[6] Therefore, it could be seen that a monopoly on violence may not be necessary for society to function.



