CouchSurfing
The CouchSurfing Project is a free, Internet-based, international hospitality service, and it is currently the largest hospitality exchange network. The project was commenced in 2003 and formally launched on Jan 1, 2004.
As of March 2009, it had more than 1 million members in 232 countries and territories. According to their own published statistics, 35% of their members are currently offering their couches to host travelers (with another 18% saying "maybe", and others who are travelling at the moment).[1] According to Alexa it is currently the most visited hospitality service on the Internet, averaging more than 30 million daily page views in July 2008.[2]
Members use the website to coordinate contacts and home accommodation (or "surf" others' "couches") with other network members around the world. The website allows the creation of extensive profiles, and uses an optional credit card verification system, a personal vouching system, and personal references to increase security and trust between members. The site offers other features such as discussion groups, events and meetings, and live chat.


The CouchSurfing project was originally conceived by Casey Fenton in 2000. According to Fenton's own account, the idea arose after finding an inexpensive flight from Boston to Iceland. Rather than stay at a hostel, Fenton randomly emailed 1500 students from the University of Iceland asking if he could stay. Fenton ultimately received more than fifty offers of accommodation. On the return flight to Boston he began to develop the ideas that would underpin the CouchSurfing project.[2]

Fenton developed the code intermittently over the next few years, and the site was launched with the cooperation of Dan Hoffer, Sebastien Le Tuan, and Leonardo Silveira[3] as a beta in January, 2003. The project became a public website in January of 2004.
Initial growth of the site was slow, and by the end of 2004 the site had just over 6000 members. In 2005 growth accelerated and at the end of that year the membership stood at just under 45000.[4]

In June 2006 the project experienced a number of computer problems resulting in much of the database being irrevocably lost.[3] Due to the volume of critical data that had been lost, Casey Fenton was of the opinion that the project could not be resurrected and on June 29, 2006 he issued an email to the membership announcing that "It is with a heavy heart that I face the truth of this situation. CouchSurfing as we knew it doesn't exist anymore."[5]
Fenton's email was met with vocal opposition to the termination of the project and considerable support for its recreation. A CouchSurfing collective was underway in Montreal at the time, and those in attendance committed to fully recreating the original site, with users to re-enter their profile data. "CouchSurfing 2.0" was announced early in July 2006, with the intent to be operational within 10 days. The initial implementation of CouchSurfing 2.0 actually launched after only four days.[6] The current CouchSurfing slogan "Participate in Creating a Better World, One Couch At A Time" was launched concurrently.
Since the relaunch the project has received international media coverage,[7] and has grown to in excess of 1 million members.[4]


CouchSurfing International Inc. is a not-for-profit corporation incorporated in the U.S. state of New Hampshire[4] CouchSurfing is listed as a registered charity in New Hampshire [5]

The mission statement of CouchSurfing is Participate in Creating a Better World, One Couch at a Time [6]: "CouchSurfing seeks to internationally network people and places, create educational exchanges, raise collective consciousness, spread tolerance and facilitate cultural understanding. As a community we strive to do our individual and collective parts to create a better world, and we believe that the surfing of couches is a means to accomplish this goal. CouchSurfing is not about the furniture, not just about finding free accommodations around the world; it's about making connections worldwide. We make the world a better place by opening our homes, our hearts, and our lives. We open our minds and welcome the knowledge that cultural exchange makes available. We create deep and meaningful connections that cross oceans, continents and cultures. CouchSurfing wants to change not only the way we travel, but how we relate to the world!" [7]

Couchsurfing.com is registered by Domain Discreet in Portugal. CouchSurfing.org points to the same website as CouchSurfing.com, though there are some other websites using similar addresses, such as couchsurfing.net, the German couchsurfing.de, and couchsurfing.info (which points to a forum on Hospitality Club).

Membership in the organization is free, simply requiring online registration. The core activity of the organization is exchange of accommodation, or "surfing". Acting as a host, a member offers the possibility of accommodation at his or her leisure; it is not required, but is obviously encouraged. Acting as a "surfer" (guest), a traveller may search for and request accommodation at his or her destination.
This exchange is entirely consentual between the host and surfer, and the duration, nature, and terms of the surfer's stay are generally worked out in advance to the convenience of both parties. It is also expected to be free; no monetary exchange takes place except under certain circumstances (e.g. the surfer may compensate the host for food).

There are three methods to ensure security and trust, which are all visible on member profiles for potential hosts and surfers to see prior to arranging anything with each other:

Since June 2006, the website has been run in large part by CouchSurfing Collectives: events which may last days or weeks, bringing groups of CouchSurfers together in a chosen city, to develop and improve CouchSurfing. Previous Collectives took place in Montreal, Vienna, New Zealand and Thailand, with the latest one held in Alaska from June to August 2008.
Members who wish to volunteer for various tasks on the site and help spread the word about CouchSurfing in general may become ambassadors. Ambassadors must be verified and actively promote the CouchSurfing spirit among members and to the public. In addition to promoting use of the site, they greet new members, help with questions and perform other administrative tasks, all on a volunteer basis.


