Digital literacy
Digital literacy is the ability to locate, organize, understand, evaluate, and create information using digital technology. It involves a working knowledge of current high-technology, and an understanding of how it can be used. Digitally literate people can communicate and work more efficiently, especially with those who possess the same knowledge and skills. Certifications are available to determine if a person is digitally literate.
Digital literacy encompasses computer hardware, software (particularly those used most frequently by businesses), the Internet, cell phones, PDAs, and other digital devices.

Official certification in digital literacy allows employees to validate their knowledge of digital media. Certification curricula often change as technology advances, making it necessary for many to re-certify to remain competitive.
ECDL Foundation, established by the Council of European Professional Informatics Societies (CEPIS), is the worldwide governing body and licensing authority for ECDL (European Computer Driving Licence) and ICDL (International Computer Driving Licence), a global standard in end-user computer skills, offering a high-quality certification designed and approved by international Subject Matter Experts and supported by governments, informatics informatics societies, international organisations and corporations globally.
According to the ECDL Foundation website, ECDL Foundation works at local, national and international levels throughout the world to encourage policy makers, INGOs (International Non Governmental Organisations) and organisations to incorporate digital literacy training and certification into their policies, programmes and activities to promote the proficient use of ICT for the benefit of society and the economy as a whole.
The Global Digital Literacy Council (GDLC) establishes the curriculum for Certiport Internet and Core Computing Certification. The latest standard, Global Standard 3, was signed by the council on August 1, 2008.[1]. According to the GDLC Web site, "The development of the Global Standard 3 took over 9 months of research, data collection from 400+ subject matter experts from over 30 countries and final ratification from the members of the Global Digital Literacy Council."
Certiport Internet and Computing Core Certification (IC³) is often considered a digital literacy standard among professionals and educators.[2] It verifies a person's fundamental knowledge and skills of computers and using the Internet.

Those who are digitally literate are more likely to be economically secure[3]. Many jobs require a working knowledge of computers and the Internet to perform basic functions. As wireless technology improves, more jobs require proficiency with cell phones and PDAs (sometimes combined into smart phones).
White collar jobs are increasingly performed primarily on computers and portable devices. Many of these jobs require proof of digital literacy to be hired or promoted. Sometimes companies will administer their own tests to employees, or official certification will be required.
As technology has become cheaper and more readily available, more blue-collar jobs have required digital literacy as well. Manufacturers and retailers, for example, are expected to collect and analyze data about productivity and market trends to stay competitive. Construction workers often use computers to increase employee safety.[4]
Job recruiters often use employment Web sites to find potential employees, thus magnifying the importance of digital literacy in securing a job.

Schools are continually updating their curriculum for digital literacy to keep up with accelerating technological developments. This often includes computers in the classroom, the use of educational software to teach curriculum, and course materials being available to students, online. Some classrooms are designed to use smartboards and audience response systems. These techniques are most effective when the teacher is digitally literate, as well.
Teachers often teach digital literacy skills to students who use computers for research. Such skills include verifying credible sources Online and how to cite Web sites.
Educators are often required to be certified in digital literacy to teach certain software and, more prevalently, to prevent plagiarism amongst students.
Libraries are using games increasingly such as the Digital Literacy Contest to raise awareness about digital literacy.[5] [6]

Digital literacy helps people communicate and keep up with societal trends. Literacy in social network services and Web 2.0 sites help people stay in contact with others, pass timely information and even sell goods and services. This is mostly popular among younger generations, though sites like LinkedIn have made it valuable to older professionals.
Digital literacy also prevents from believing hoaxes that are spread Online or are the result of photo manipulation. E-mail frauds and phishing often take advantage of the digitally illiterate, costing victims money and making them vulnerable to identity theft.

Government officials around the world have emphasized the importance of digital literacy for their economy. According to HotChalk, an Online resource for educators: "Nations with centralized education systems, such as China, are leading the charge and implementing digital literacy training programs faster than anyone else. For those countries, the news is good."
Many developing nations are also focusing on digital literacy education to compete globally.
Economically, socially and regionally marginalised people have benefited from the ECDL Foundation’s ECDL / ICDL programme through funding and support from Corporate Social Responsibility initiatives, international development agency funding and non-governmental organisations(NGO’s).
The Philippines' Education Secretary Jesli Lapus has emphasized the importance of digital literacy in Filipino education. He claims a resistance to change is the main obstacle to improving the nation's education in the globalized world. In 2008, Lapus was inducted into Certiport's "Champions of Digital Literacy" Hall of Fame for his work to emphasize digital literacy.[7]



