Oyster card
The Oyster card is a form of electronic ticketing used on public transport services within the Greater London area of the United Kingdom. It is promoted by Transport for London and is valid on a number of different travel systems including London Underground, buses, the Docklands Light Railway (DLR), London Overground, trams and some National Rail services.
Oyster is a blue, credit-card-sized stored value card which can hold a variety of single tickets, period tickets and travel permits which must be added to the card prior to travel. It is also a contactless smartcard which passengers must pass over electronic readers when entering and leaving the transport system in order to validate it or deduct funds. The cards may be "recharged" in person from numerous sales points, by direct debit or by online purchase. The card is designed to reduce the number of cash transactions at ticket offices and the number of single paper tickets sold on the London transport network. Usage is encouraged by offering substantially cheaper fares on Oyster than payment with cash.[1]
The card was first issued to the public in July 2003 with a limited range of features and there continues to be a phased introduction of further functions. By March 2007 over 10 million Oyster cards had been issued,[2] and more than 80% of all journeys on services run by Transport for London used the Oyster card.[3]


The Oyster card system was set up under a Private Finance Initiative (PFI) contract between TfL and TranSys, a consortium of suppliers which includes EDS and Cubic Corporation (who are responsible for the day-to-day management of the system) and Fujitsu and WS Atkins (shareholders with no active involvement in running the system).[4] The £100 million contract was signed in 1998 and was due to run for a term of 17 years until 2015. In August 2008, TfL decided to exercise a break option in the contract to terminate the operating agreement in 2010, five years early. The termination of the contract followed a number of technical failures in the system.[5] TfL, however, stated that the contractual break was not connected to the system failures, but was due to cost savings.[6] In November 2008, a new contract was announced between TfL and Cubic and EDS, which would see two of the original consortium shareholders running the Oyster system from 2010 until 2013.[7]


The Oyster brand name was agreed after a lengthy period of research managed by TranSys, the company contracted to deliver the ticketing system in London, and agreed by Transport for London. A number of alternative names were considered; however, Oyster was chosen as a fresh approach that was not directly linked to transport, ticketing or London. According to Andrew McCrum, now of Appella brand name consultants, who was brought in to find a name by Saatchi and Saatchi Design (in turn contracted by TranSys), Oyster was conceived and subsequently promoted because of the metaphorical implications of security and value in the component meanings of the hard bivalve shell and the concealed pearl. Its associations with London through Thames estuary oyster beds and the popular idiom 'the world is your oyster' were also significant factors in its selection as was the uniqueness of the word Oyster.[citation needed]
The intellectual property rights to the Oyster brand originally belonged to the operator Transys. Following renegotiation of the operating contract in 2008, TfL acquired the rights to the brand so that it could continue to use the Oyster name indefinitely.[8][7]

The Oyster card is a contactless smartcard, with a claimed proximity range of about 8 cm (3 inches). The scheme is operated by TranSys, and is based on NXP/Philips' MIFARE standard 1k chips provided by Giesecke & Devrient and SchlumbergerSema.[9] It is the same contactless smartcard as Touch 'n Go card in Malaysia which is mainly used for tollway fares. The technology used for the Oyster card is known as Radio-frequency identification (RFID), which is the same technology used in other electronic pass cards like Japan's Suica fare cards and other cards used all over the world.[10]The Oyster card acts as an aerial while the reader acts as a receiver. However this technology means that the cards transmit information whenever they come into range of a reader and it has been suggested that a good reader could read personal details off it from quite a distance. Aluminium shielding has been suggested by people to prevent any personal data from being read.[11]
In 2008 a fashion caught on for removing the RFID chip from Oyster cards and attaching it to wrist watches and bracelets. This allowed commuters to pass through the gates by "swiping" their hand without the need to take out a proper card. Although the RFID chips were charged in the normal way and no fare evasion was involved, TfL disapproved of the practice and threatened to fine anyone not carrying a full, undamaged card.[12]

Travellers touch the card on a distinctive yellow circular reader (a Cubic Tri-Reader) on the automated barriers at London Underground stations to 'touch in' and 'touch out' at the start and end of a journey (contact is not necessary, but the range of the reader is only a few inches). Tram stops and buses also have readers, on the driver/conductor's ticket machine or, in the case of articulated buses, near the other entrance doors as well. Oyster cards can be used to store both period travelcards and bus passes (of one week or more), and a Pay as you go balance.
The system is asynchronous, with the current balance and ticket data held electronically on the card rather than in the central database. The main database is updated periodically with information received from the card by barriers and validators. Tickets purchased online or over the telephone are "loaded" at a preselected barrier or validator.
Non-Oyster tickets (referred to below as paper tickets) take various forms. Bus tickets issued at bus stops are usually thermally printed; tickets usable at tube, DLR, and rail stations are cards with a magnetic strip which activates barriers in a similar way to Oyster cards, although a magnetic head must be passed directly over the strip to read the information.


In early 2007, TfL and Deloitte worked together to migrate the on-line payment systems to a more 'open' architecture, using a number of open source components such as Linux, to resolve issues of lock-in costs, updates, incorporation of new security standards of PCI DSS, non-scalability, low and inconsistent quality of service, slower response time to business changes.[2]
Nevertheless, some proprietary software were used for the scanners in buses and underground stations by EDS and the back-end clustered database by Oracle. These were connected to the online systems by Web services.
The new site immediately helped cut the regular charges for licensing and hosting by 80 per cent by allowing Tfl to shop around for the best hosting deal.

Oyster cards can be registered or protected for loss or theft. Full registration of a card must be done in person at a London Underground station, Oyster ticket stop (shop) or a Travel Information Centre. To do this, an Oyster registration form must be filled in (either at time of purchase or at any time in the future). Registration in this way allows the customer to buy any product for the card, allows them to have an after sales service, and protects against theft or loss. The customer needs to supply a Security Answer which is either their mother's maiden name, a memorable place or a memorable date.
Oyster cards cannot be fully registered online. However, a customer can protect their card online by setting an Oyster online account and recording their card to that account. This allows for a limited after sales service and protection against theft or loss, but the customer will be prevented from purchasing Travelcards lasting a month or longer for an unregistered card.

Oyster cards can be purchased from a number of different outlets in the London area:
A refundable deposit of £3 is paid unless a weekly or longer period ticket is loaded to the card in the first instance. A registration form is provided at the time of purchase. If the form is not completed the Oyster card is restricted to Pay as you go and weekly tickets.
Most National Rail stations and termini do not sell or top up Oyster card products; TfL publish a list of the participating stations. At several main line termini, TfL run Travel Information Centres which do sell Oyster.

An Oyster card can hold up to three season tickets at the same time. Season tickets are Bus & Tram Passes or Travelcards lasting 7 days, 1 month, or any duration up to one year (annual).
Oyster card Travelcard holders need not "touch in" at the start of a journey by London Underground or DLR, nor "touch out" again at the end unless they intend to travel outside the zones for which their Travelcard is valid. If they need to "touch in" or "touch out" to operate ticket barriers or because they intend to travel outside the zones for which their Travelcard is valid this is done by touching the Oyster card against an Oyster reader at a ticket barrier or at other entry/exit points in the system. As long as the Travelcard holder stays within their permitted zones no fare will be deducted from the pay as you go funds on the card. The Oyster system checks that the Travelcard is valid in the zones it is being used in. If the user travels outside the valid zones of their Travelcard, any remaining fare due may be deducted from their pay as you go funds (see below for how this is calculated).
There is no essential difference in validity or cost between a 7 day, monthyl or longer period Travelcard on Oyster and one on a traditional paper ticket; they are valid on all Underground, Overground, DLR, bus, tram and national rail services within the zones purchased. See the main article for a fuller explanation of Travelcards. Note that any Travelcard, for whatever zones, is valid on any London Bus.

When the Oyster card Travelcard is due to expire, it can be renewed at the normal sales points and ticket machines at London Underground or London Overground stations, Oyster Ticket Stop agents, or some National Rail stations. Travelcards can also be renewed online via the Oystercard website, or by telephone sales from TfL; users must then nominate a Tube station where they will swipe their card in order to charge up the card with the funds purchased. This can only be done the day after ordering.[14] Travelcard renewals cannot be added from a reader on a bus.

In addition to holding Travelcards and bus passes, Oyster cards can also be used as stored-value cards, holding electronic funds of money. Amounts are deducted from the card each time it is used, and the funds can be "recharged" when required. The maximum value that an Oyster card may hold is £90. This system is known as "pay as you go" (abbreviated to PAYG), because instead of holding a season ticket, the user only pays at the point of use.
When Oyster cards were first introduced, the PAYG system was initially named "pre pay", and this name is still sometimes used by National Rail. TfL officially refers to the system as "pay as you go" in all publicity.

Oyster card holders must "touch in" at the start of a journey by London Underground or DLR, and "touch out" again at the end. In the case of PAYG cards, the Oyster card readers automatically calculate the correct fare based on the start and end points of the journey and deduct that fare from the Oyster card. A card may also hold a season ticket such as a Travelcard; if the user travels outside the valid zones of their season ticket, the balance is deducted from their PAYG funds.
Passengers enter or exit most London Underground stations through ticket barriers which are operated by swiping an Oyster card or other valid ticket. Some Tube stations (such as those at National Rail interchanges) and DLR stations have standalone validators with no barriers. In both instances, PAYG users are required to touch in and out.
All ticket offices at stations run by London Underground will sell or recharge Oyster cards, or handle Oyster card refunds. However, some Tube stations are actually operated by National Rail train operating companies, and their ticket offices will not deal with Oyster refunds. DLR ticket offices do not sell any Oyster card top-ups or handle refunds.

Users must touch the Oyster card only once at the point of boarding. Because London buses have a single flat fare, there is no need to calculate an end point of the journey.
Some London bus routes cross outside the Greater London boundary before reaching their terminus. Pay as you go users are permitted to travel the full length of these route on buses operated as part of the London Bus network, even to destinations some distance outside Greater London.
For routes operated under 'London Local Service Agreements', travel is possible using PAYG on route 84 as far as Potters Bar, and route 614 within Greater London. On other LLSA routes, a reduced cash fare of 90p within Greater London applies when an Oystercard is shown.[15] [16]

As London's trams operate on the same fare structure as buses, the rules are similar and users with pre-pay must touch the Oyster card only once at the point of boarding (users with Travelcards valid for the Tramlink zones need not touch in)
