Jeskola Buzz
Jeskola Buzz is a proprietary modular software music studio environment centered around a modular plugin-based machine view and a multiple pattern sequencer tracker (as opposed to a single pattern sequencer tracker)[1].
Buzz consists of a plugin architecture that allows the audio to be routed from one plugin to another in many ways, similar to how cables carry an audio signal between physical pieces of hardware. All aspects of signal synthesis and manipulation are handled entirely by the plugin system. Signal synthesis is performed by "Generators" such as synthesizers, noise generator functions, samplers, and trackers. The signal can then be manipulated further by "Effects" such as distortions, filters, delays, and mastering plugins. Buzz also provides support through adapters to use VST/VSTi, DirectX/DXi, and DirectX Media Objects as Generators and Effects.
A few new classes of plugins do not fall under the normal Generator and Effect types. These include Peer Machines (signal and event automated controllers), Recorders, Wavetable editors, Scripting engines, etc. Buzz signal output also uses a plugin system; the most practical drivers include ASIO, DirectSound, and MME. Buzz supports MIDI both internally and through several enhancements. Some midi features are limited or hacked together such as MIDI clock sync.
The program has created a large community of musicians, and hundreds of machines made by several plugin developers. Some of these developers have gone on to create DirectX and VST plugins. Other developers, who have released commercial DirectX and VST plugins, have released Buzz versions of their plugins. Some developers have been inspired by the application to create "Buzz clones".

Buzz was created by Oskari Tammelin of the PC demogroup Jeskola, hence the name.
Oskari has recently restarted development on Buzz with builds being released regularly from June till recent.[2]
The development of the core program, buzz.exe, was halted on October 5, 2000, when the developer lost the source code to the program. It was announced in June 2008 that development would begin again, and the several subsequent releases have regained much of the functionality of the last 2000 software release, and have included some modernised features and graphics. During the period when the source was considered lost and development on the core of buzz was stalled, many new and unique ideas were developed using the existing plugin interface and binary "hacks".
Buzz was originally known as the first "3rd Generation Tracker" in 1997-98. Since then, through the help of programmers and addons like CyanPhase Overloader, Buzz has moved well beyond this stereotype and become a unique and powerful piece of audio software, often drawing comparisons to features found in similar applications like Max/MSP, Pure Data, Reaktor, Bidule and Usine.

Many applications have been derived from or inspired by the concepts, interfaces, and formats of Buzz. These have been collectively termed "Buzz clones" or "mid-level modular" programs by the Buzz community, depending how closely the application resembles the original Buzz. Applications under this umbrella may also be considered "Buzz clones" because the developers making them have close ties to the Buzz scene. There is debate in various Buzz forums as to how far an application can diverge from Buzz and still be considered a Buzz clone, since some applications attempt full compatibility with the original plugin system and document model (i.e. the machine view, sequencer, patterns, and wavetable) whereas others borrow the concept of mid-level modules without retaining compatibility with Buzz plugins or documents. Buzé is a good example of a "Buzz clone" that maintains a high degree of compatibility with both the existing file format and user interface.
Some Buzz clones are also being developed to experiment with the idea of abstracting the user interface into the plugin system. Other projects are aiming to bring Buzz-like functionality on other platforms such as Linux. For instance, Buzztard is an effort to recreate a Buzz-like environment under a free software license which runs under Linux.
There is a listing of many buzz clones, with subjective ratings to give hints of their diversity, at the Buzzclones entry of the Buzz-centric wiki BuzzWiki. A similar list can also be found under Related Software Packages on Buzztard's webpage.

Buzz's plugin system is intended to be a freeware-only plugin format. This desire has been respected by the community, except for a certain time for Jeskola XS-1 (which has now become freeware). Almost all plugins released to the Buzz scene can be found at BuzzMachines.com, a centralized webpage that provides a way for the entire community to access new plugins.
The header files used to compile new plugins (known as the Buzzlib) contain a small notice that they are only to be used for making freeware plugins and Buzz file music players. In the case of entire software suites, Buzz clones, or sequencers that want to use the Buzz plugin system, the author asks for a fee. In 2001, Image-Line Software paid to add Buzz support to their commercial program, FL Studio[3]. This created a controversy within the community because the commercial aspect of the application did not sit well with several freeware plugin developers. A truce was reached when Image-Line Software gave time for the developers to opt-out of the deal.

Jeskola Buzz has proven popular within a range of genres, notably glitch, IDM, click-house, and other modern electronic genres. Famous users of the tracker include:



