Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas soundtrack
The soundtrack of the computer and video game Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas, which is set in 1992 in the fictional U.S. West Coast state of San Andreas, required that the game's radio stations reflect the music tastes of the time and area, in addition to covering current events in the state of San Andreas, and even weather forecasts. Together with several pieces of early-1990s music, the soundtrack also included songs from the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s and 1980s. Many of the songs interpolate or sample other songs which feature in this or other GTA titles, such as Ice Cube's "Check Yo Self", which samples "The Message", which was featured in Vice City or "Weekend" which appears in its original form on Paradise FM in Grand Theft Auto: Vice City Stories.
Primarily, the player can hear the radio when the protagonist acquires a vehicle. He can also listen to the radio in the audio options menu if not in a car. The station that will be playing when the player gets in is determined by several factors, and players can change it or switch it off as desired. The only vehicles in which the player cannot access the radio are the emergency and police vehicles (which use the Police radio station), tractors, bicycles, forklifts, the Bandito sandrail, and certain boats. Radio stations, or some of the songs featured on them, can also be heard in the background in certain locations, such as bars, clothing stores, clubs, casinos, and safehouse wardrobes. The Xbox and PC versions of the game allow the player to create their own custom radio stations with user imported tracks. However, unlike previous GTA titles, which also offered this feature, San Andreas can place commercials between tracks.[1]
The official soundtrack, available on Interscope Records, Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas Official Soundtrack and the Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas Official Soundtrack Box Set collection were released internationally on November 23, 2004 and December 7, 2004 respectively. Michael Hunter is the composer of the theme song and incidental music.


DJ: The Funktipus
Genre: Funk, R&B
Tracklist:
Summary: Bounce FM is a funk radio station hosted by The Funktipus (voiced by George Clinton[3]) Surprisingly, Marvin Trill of WCTR's Area 53 host, calls into Bounce FM foolishly thinking that 'The Party Ship' (Bounce's sub-heading/nickname) is a genuine space ship, asking how to get on it.

DJ: Phillip "PM" Michaels
Genre: New Jack Swing, R&B
Tracklist:
Summary: Contemporary Soul Radio (CSR 103:9) is a new jack swing radio station hosted by Phillip "PM" Michaels (voiced by Michael Bivins[3]). Michaels is an extremely self-obsessed character who believes that he is the next big star, despite his entertainment career having very limited success. The game's "Audio" screen and instruction manual refer to this station as CSR 103:2.

DJ: Tommy "The Nightmare" Smith
Genre: Classic rock
Tracklist:
Summary: K-DST "The Dust" is a classic rock station originating in Los Santos and hosted by Tommy "The Nightmare" Smith (voiced by Guns N' Roses frontman Axl Rose[3]), former frontman for the fictional 70s progressive rock band, Crystal Ship, which is also the title of a song by The Doors. Smith is suprisingly calm and constantly reminds the listeners about the 70s and the classic "rock n roll" lifestyle". He dislikes Sage, the Radio X DJ, telling her to "get over it!" during the intro to Tom Petty's "Runnin' Down a Dream", which is ironic because Radio X plays the Guns N' Roses hit "Welcome to the Jungle" And before the song commences Sage says "I slept with this guy once."

DJ: Marshall Peters and Johnny Lawton
Genre: Dub, Reggae, Dancehall
Tracklist:
Summary: K-Jah West is a reggae radio station hosted by Marshall Peters & Johnny Lawton (voiced by Lowell Dunbar and Robbie Shakespeare respectively[3]). It is also K-JAH's West Coast affiliate.

DJ: Mary-Beth Maybell
Genre: Country
Tracklist:
Summary: K Rose is a Classic country station hosted by Mary-Beth Maybell (voiced by Riette Burdick[3]), and based in Bone County (Fort Carson). Mary-Beth has been married numerous times, many of her husbands having died under suspicious circumstances. Oddly, the track New York City was not listed in the included booklet guide for the first PS2 version. It was however included in later versions.

DJ: Johnny "The Love Giant" Parkinson
Genre: Funk, Soul, Rare Groove
Tracklist:
