Baijiu

Baijiu (Chinese: 白酒; pinyin: báijiǔ), or shaojiu (烧酒) is a Chinese distilled alcoholic beverage. The name baijiu literally means "white liquor," "white alcohol" or "white spirits". Baijiu is often mistakenly translated as "wine" or "white wine," but it is actually a distilled liquor, generally about 80 to 120 proof, or 40-60% alcohol by volume (ABV) (ethanol).
Baijiu is a clear drink usually distilled from sorghum, although sometimes other grains may be used; baijiu varieties produced in southern China are typically made from glutinous rice, while those from northern China are generally made of sorghum, wheat, barley, millet, or occasionally Job's tears.
Because of its clarity, baijiu can appear similar to several other liquors, but generally has a significantly higher ABV than, for example, vodka (35-50%), Japanese shōchū (25%), or Korean soju (20-45%), and its flavour is distinctive and unique.

Chinese traditionally serve baijiu either warm or at room temperature in a small ceramic bottle. They then pour the baijiu into small cups. Baijiu may be purchased as a set of items consisting of bottles of baijiu, a small heater, and four to six small cups. The serving method and containers are similar to those which are used to serve sake and soju, although as a drink baijiu differs significantly from the latter two beverages. Baijiu is generally sold in glass or ceramic bottles and consumed in shot glasses much like vodka. It is traditional to consume baijiu together with food rather than drinking it on its own, though the latter is not uncommon.
In 2007, there was a report in Time magazine that mentioned integrating baijiu into cocktails.[1]

There are a number of accounts in English which comment unfavorably on the taste of baijiu, comparing it with, for example paint thinner, rubbing alcohol or diesel fuel. The typically high ABV of much baijiu is commonly cited as the reason for these impressions.[1][2]

Low grades of baijiu can be quite inexpensive; a bottle of roughly eight ounces may be purchased for the same price as a can of beer. However, higher grades, which are often aged for many years, can be quite expensive; the highest grade of Wuliangye (五粮液) retails for 26,800 yuan (US$3,375).[3] Some popular varieties of baijiu include Maotai jiu, gaoliang jiu, erguotou, and Wuliangye.

While Chinese fermented wines, or huangjiu, have a wide variety of classification methods, baijiu are grouped primarily by their fragrance.






