Carmen Sandiego
Carmen Sandiego refers to a media franchise of educational computer and video games, television programs, books and other media featuring Carmen Sandiego, a thieving villainess of the same name. The basic premise of the franchise has the user or protagonists being agents of the ACME Detective Agency, which attempts to thwart and capture V.I.L.E. ringleader and former ACME agent Carmen Sandiego. The series initially focused on teaching geography and history, though it later branched out into mathematics, English and other subjects.
Originally distributed in the United States and Canada, most of the computer games are now available to international audiences. With the exception of Carmen Sandiego: Junior Detective Edition, all the games in the series are aimed at preteens, although the geography and history games are often difficult enough for adults since much of the trivia learned are not widely known. Many entries in the series contain elements of various genres, including mystery, comedy, science fiction, spy-fi and fantasy.



Carmen Sandiego was originally conceived by Broderbund Software co-founder Gary Carlston and proposed to programmer Dane Bigham in 1983. The idea was to create a computer game which would get kids interested in almanacs, a childhood hobby of Broderbund co-founders Gary and Doug Carlston. Bigham provided the "look and feel" for the game interface from an adventure game he was developing independently and further development was entrusted to the creative "Rubber Room", led by ex-Disney artist Gene Portwood and Lauren Elliott at Brøderbund Software.
The game script, graphics and humor were created by Gene Portwood and Lauren Elliott, and writer David Siefkin. Siefkin wrote one of the first scripts for the game which ultimately provided the game mechanics and which included treasures stolen from countries around the world, clues taken from the World Almanac, and a villain named Carmen Sandiego, whose name he adapted from the name of 1940s singer and actress Carmen Miranda. Siefkin left the project soon afterwards to become a foreign service officer, serving as a diplomat in several of the countries featured in the game. He is listed in the game manual as a contributing author.
Another early draft version of the game was based in England, chasing Henry VII around town collecting treasures.
Catherine Byrd was the first project manager at Brøderbund Software and the original project manager of the game. The game was programmed by Dane Bigham. Graphics and clues were by Gene Portwood and Lauren Elliott. The final name and scenario of the game came out of a number of meetings between the development group.
The first Carmen Sandiego software game, Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?, was released in 1985 for the Apple II computer and was subsequently ported to other systems. The first seven games were each awarded one or more SPA Excellence in Software Awards, particularly for their educational effort. The Brøderbund-produced games were as follows:

The first game in the series, Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?, established a formula that was followed very faithfully in all Carmen Sandiego products for over ten years. This formula involves a series of missions in which the user tracks and apprehends each of Carmen's underlings. Each case begins with the user being alerted that a spectacular theft has been committed. Immediately transported to the scene of the crime, the user must find clues to infer the suspect's next stop and to create an arrest warrant describing the guilty party's attributes. The culprit travels through a series of different destinations in an attempt to shake off any pursuers so the user will have to continue tracking the thief for some time. The game continues in this manner until the user catches up with culprit, at which point the thief is arrested and, if the warrant is correct, put in prison. As more and more thieves are arrested, the user rises up through ACME's ranks and the cases the user is assigned become more difficult. On the last case, the perpetrator turns out to be Carmen Sandiego herself and once she is arrested the program is completed.
With Carmen Sandiego Word Detective, Carmen Sandiego Math Detective, and especially Carmen Sandiego's Great Chase Through Time, Brøderbund began to abandon this formula. Word Detective and Math Detective involve the user infiltrating V.I.L.E. hideouts around the world and therefore maintain the globe-hopping element of previous games. Great Chase Through Time, however, nearly completely abandoned the series' original formula and has the user spending each mission in one time period, where the goal is to first create makeshift solutions to any historical problems that the theft has caused and second to find the thief Carmen has dropped off. The last mission of Time in which the user tracks down Carmen is similar to the traditional formula, although the user does not construct a warrant.

The games created by Brøderbund featured silly humor and especially a distinctive style of word play with extensive use of puns, rhymes and alliteration. This style of word play was also present, in varying degrees, in all three of the Carmen Sandiego TV shows.
Gag names ("Hardley Worthit," "Rob M. Blind," "Ruth Less," "Joy Ryder," "M. T. Pockets," etc.) were quite frequently used in the series, often to the point where Carmen herself seemed to be the only person without such a name. Clues about the suspect's next destination often used extended puns (example: "I pumped her for information, but her unrefined answer only suggested a crude plan to visit oil wells near Ahvaz.") or rhyming couplets. Even as the games began to abandon their original formula, this word play was still retained. For example, a news report on massive blackouts from Carmen Sandiego Math Detective quotes an official as saying, "We're taking a dim view of the situation."
Although Carmen's V.I.L.E. agents were often portrayed as cartoonish buffoons, they seemed to be capable of "stealing" landmarks, cities, national parks, notable exports (such as "stealing all the sushi from Japan") and the like. Her thieves have also been known to steal geographic features and even nonexistent map features such as the Mason-Dixon line. Some thefts were even non sequiturs based on word play, such as "robbing the banks of the Nile," or plays on the word "steal" such as "stealing the show."

After Brøderbund was purchased by The Learning Company in 1998, the Learning Company apparently sought to redesign the series. Under The Learning Company, the series seems to beplay its premise more seriously and uses character-based humor. Since The Learning Company has only created two Carmen Sandiego games, one of which is no longer sold, this change is evident mainly through marketing and which Brøderbund products The Learning Company has chosen to continue to sell.
The first title released by The Learning Company was Carmen Sandiego's ThinkQuick Challenge, a quiz game with a similar tonality to Carmen Sandiego: Word Detective and Carmen Sandiego: Math Detective, including the reappearance of Chase Devineaux. The new structure of Time was apparently to The Learning Company's liking since their new version of Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?, fully titled Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego? Treasures of Knowledge, was similar.
The Learning Company decided to return the series to its original focus on geography and history, discontinuing Word Detective, Math Detective, and ThinkQuick Challenge.

In 2004, Bam! Entertainment released Carmen Sandiego: The Secret of the Stolen Drums to the GameCube, Xbox and PlayStation 2. It is so far the only game of the franchise to use real-time 3D computer graphics, although many previous games had used pre-rendered 3D graphics. It was also an action game and while geographical facts were included, learning them was not necessary to complete the game. Although The Learning Company evidently licensed the use of the series as well as some of their own characters from Treasures of Knowledge, this game is not distributed by or sold under The Learning Company name.

Carmen's character has also appeared in three television shows, two of them game shows that aired on PBS. The first was Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?, which aired from September 1991 to September 1996. This series won a Peabody Award and many other awards for children's television. It was followed by Where in Time is Carmen Sandiego?, which was on until September 1998. The third show was an animated series titled Where on Earth is Carmen Sandiego?, which debuted in February 1994 on Fox and ran for four seasons.

This was the original PBS series designed for children 8-12. The World series was staged in a slightly off-skew detective office, part of the ACME agency with Lynne Thigpen portraying the Chief and Greg Lee portraying himself as a special agent in charge of training new recruits. Greg was helped in this training by various live and animated characters. Among the most popular were the members of the a cappella house band and comedy troupe, Rockapella, who also sang the show's theme song.
The game was played in three rounds: the first round was Q&A, and the two contestants ("gumshoes") with the highest scores proceeded to a second round. In this round, they had to find, in order, the loot, the warrant and the cartoon crook. The winner of the second round went to the third round. As host Greg Lee shouted the names or places in a region of the world the player had to place a marker on the corresponding place on a giant map of that area. A successful contestant would win a trip anywhere in the lower 48 states, later anywhere in North America..

The Time series, hosted by Kevin Shinick, refocused the show on history, but was otherwise similar to the previous show's format, even featuring Lynne Thigpen returning as the Chief. Rockapella, however, was replaced by a dance group, The Engine Crew. The final round of this show involved answering various history related questions to open six "time doors"; if a question was answered correctly, the player walked through the door. If it was answered incorrectly, however, the player had to turn a crank, pull a lever, or do some other task that ate into the 90-second time limit. If they got through all the doors, they received a personal computer as their prize.

Where on Earth is Carmen Sandiego? is a Saturday morning cartoon series made by DiC that originally aired on FOX. It featured the adventures of Zack and Ivy, two teenage siblings who worked as ACME agents and, aided by the Max Headroom-like Chief, had to stop Carmen (voiced by Rita Moreno) and her gang from stealing artifacts. The series won an Emmy in 1995. Its episodes have subsequently been repeated on the Fox Family Channel, the Pax network, and Univision. The 1st season has now been released on DVD.

In the late 1990s, the Metro Washington Park Zoo in Portland, Oregon, (now the Oregon Zoo), in conjunction with Brøderbund, ran a summer-long event titled Where in the Zoo is Carmen Sandiego?[1], which functioned as a full-immersion live-action Carmen game in which zoo patrons were the investigating detectives. Actors were hired to play Carmen's henchmen, who could be found around the zoo, and on occasions a costumed Carmen appeared, as well, but never in a location where patrons could interact with her. Clues were given out at various stations by members of the ZooTeens volunteer group.
Where in the Universe is Carmen Sandiego? is a movie that was made to be played in a planetarium. It is less like a traditional movie, and more like one of the Carmen Sandiego game shows featured on PBS with the live audience as the detectives. This movie also featured Lynne Thigpen as the Chief and was based on Where in Space is Carmen Sandiego?. Where in the Universe is Carmen Sandiego? II is a sequel to Where in the Universe is Carmen Sandiego?. It marked Thigpen's last appearance as the Chief before her death.
Efforts were made at least once, in 1997, to produce a film featuring the character, possibly starring Sandra Bullock as the titular thief.[2]

In 1991 John Peel wrote a series of Carmen Sandiego Books that were "which way" format. The books had removable inserts that provided clues and the identities of the villains. These books were titled:

University Games published a couple of games based on Carmen Sandiego including Where in the USA is Carmen Sandiego, Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego, and Where in Time is Carmen Sandiego. It was one of the most successful board game licenses of a computer property ever developed.




