Torx
TORX, developed by Camcar LLC of Acument Global Technologies (formerly Camcar Textron), is the trademark for a type of screw head characterized by a 6-point star-shaped pattern (in the same way that slotted heads, Phillips, hex socket, and Robertson have linear, cruciform, hexagonal, and square tips, respectively). People unfamiliar with the trademark generally use the term star, as in star screwdriver or star bits. The generic name is hexalobular internal driving feature and is standardised by the International Organization for Standardization as ISO 10664. TORX is frequently styled Torx despite the official all-caps trademark styling.
By design, TORX head screws resist cam-out better than Phillips head or slot head (flathead) screws. Where Phillips heads were designed to cause the driver to cam out, to prevent over-tightening, TORX heads were designed to prevent it. The reason for this was the development of better torque-limiting automatic screwdrivers for use in factories. Rather than relying on the tool slipping out of the screw head when a torque level is reached, and thereby risking damage to the driver tip, screw head and workpiece, the drivers were designed to achieve a desired torque consistently. Camcar LLC claims this can increase tool bit life by ten times or more.
TORX drive system was developed in the Camcar Technical center, located in Rockford, Illinois.
TORX screws are commonly found on automobiles, bicycle brake systems, hard disk drives, computer systems (Compaq uses almost exclusively T15 screws) and consumer electronics. Initially, they were used in applications requiring tamper-resistance since the drive systems and screwdrivers were not widely available; as drivers became more common, tamper-resistant variants, as described below, were developed.[1] Today, TORX screws are also becoming increasingly popular in construction industries.
Camcar LLC developed an improved profile, designated TORX PLUS.

TORX head sizes are described using the capital letter "T", followed by a number. A smaller number corresponds to a smaller point-to-point dimension of the screw head. Common sizes include T10, T15 and T25, although they reach as high as T100. A sample chart is available here. Only the proper driver can drive a specific head size without risk of ruining the driver or screw. The same series of TORX drivers is used to drive SAE, metric and other thread system fasteners, reducing the number of bit sizes required.



